IT INFRASTRUCTURE
RESILIENCY REVIEW
23 February 2017

Introduction
Objective of the review: Structure of the report:
This report presents the findings of the IT Infrastructure Resiliency • Executive summary
review carried out by PA Consulting following the outage at the
1. Review findings
Strand Data Centre in October. The objective of the review was to
understand what went wrong with the infrastructure technology
1. Technology management
and how it was managed. Whilst this is important, the review also
looks forward: making sure that in the future the College manages 2. Data management
IT in such a way that appropriate and informed risks concerning
3. Business relationship management
technical resilience, business impact of system interruptions
and/or failures, reasonable user expectations and financial 4. IT Governance & decision making
affordability are accounted for and understood by management.
5. Team management
Approach and methodology:
2. Recommendations
The review was conducted in two parallel work-streams:
3. Appendix
1. Understanding the core technology issues that caused the
 List of interviews
outage
 Incident timeline
2. Getting a rounded view from the non-technical areas around
culture, engagement with the users and the wider IT and
College IT governance
The findings are based on approximately 30 interviews with
stakeholders from IT and other areas of the College as well as
reviewing the available documentation. Findings were mapped to
PA’s assessment frameworks and conclusions validated with the
relevant interviewees.
2
© PA Knowledge Limited 2016

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
3
© PA Knowledge Limited 2016

A storage system hardware failure that should have been manageable without
outage, created a chain of events with catastrophic impact to the College
On the 17th October 2016 one of the four controllers within the principal HP storage system located in the Strand Data
Centre failed. There was no user impact. HP hardware engineers then arrived on site to replace the component that
had failed. In theory the storage system should have returned to a normal state. However, the system went offline and
simultaneously many of the storage disks within it started failing leading to a complete loss of data. At this point what
had been a routine incident with no impact to users was escalated to senior management in the IT team. A pre-
documented business continuity process was instigated to establish a cross functional response team to co-ordinate
the incident resolution and subsequent service recovery. The response team produced regular progress updates to the
affected user communities, though it was difficult to provide accurate recovery time estimates on account of the fact that
the performance of backup systems had never been tested.
At the time of the incident there were multiple backup systems implemented and had they performed as intended the
data could have been recovered and the incident would have been annoying but not damaging. Unfortunately the
backup systems collectively failed to provide an adequate service and some of data was lost. Much effort has been
expended by the College to recreate data (e.g. Admissions). However in some instances data may be lost forever.
The cause of the backup failure was due to the IT technical team not fully understanding the importance of the tape
back ups within the overall backup system and not following the back up procedures completely. In addition some data
has consciously never been backed up on tape due to capacity constraints and the potential impact of this was never
communicated to the College.
It was later established, in an assessment of the incident by HP, that the inability of the storage system to return to
service after the defective hardware was replaced was due to a flaw in the firmware responsible for keeping the
hardware controllers functional. HP had issued an updated version of the firmware weeks before the incident which
they claim would have allowed the replacement controller to be installed in the storage system without a service outage.
The IT team had not had the opportunity to apply this routine firmware update before the incident.
4
© PA Knowledge Limited 2016

The nature of the failure and inability to completely restore all data raises a number
of immediate questions
Did the College buy the right
Yes – the technology supplied by HP was modern and fit for purpose. The
technology and support from HP?
College sensibly purchased additional “proactive support” when the system
was installed four years ago. However, this support package does not
provide the level of risk assessment and change management advice which
is now available through an “enhanced support” option introduced by HP in
2015. “Enhanced support” would have been, and would still be, appropriate
for this complex technology.
Are systems adequately backed up
Partial - The IT team have now moved more systems over to the new
today ?
distributed backup system to relieve the load on the legacy tape backup
system. This is now able to correctly backup all of the remaining systems
and file stores and the success reports created by the backup systems are
reviewed and acted upon on a daily basis. However this falls short of a
complete backup restoration test which is the only way of completely
ensuring that the backup system works correctly.
Is there a strategic roadmap to No – there are a number of solutions currently being considered to eliminate
ensure that the College gets the the need for the Strand Data Centre which is no longer fit for purpose.
levels of resiliency required in the However nothing has yet been presented to the College that explains the
future? levels of resiliency that a proposed solution would deliver including
guaranteed recovery times from a major failure.
5
© PA Knowledge Limited 2016

What needs to change to prevent another catastrophic situation from occurring
again ?
Over the past four years the IT leadership team have managed an ambitious transformation programme that has introduced impressive
new technology and operating processes. The business (and some in the IT team) have struggled to keep up with this change so the IT
team must now build a closer collaborative relationship with the business and within itself.
The IT team did not The consequence of the The IT team has an IT team has not been The rapid growth in IT
understand the criticality outage was severe, users inadequate understanding able to engage the team size has meant that
of the tape back ups and were unaware they stored of the needs of different College in IT governance team members have
did not ensure that these critical data user groups sufficiently to collectively been over relying on
were reliable inappropriately and the IT understand the exposure processes and focussing
team were unaware of its to risk narrowly
importance
• IT is perceived as being • IT is doing many things at • IT teams following process
• Migration from the Strand Data • Users stored valuable
distant from users and once, which has mechanically with a
Centre took longer than academic research and
engagement is reliant on overwhelmed College narrow focus on their own
expected. College administrative
process stakeholders work
• A complex infrastructure in data in shared drives
• IT do not understand the • Insufficient time has been • Too many initiatives
transition for a number of • IT did not know how users
needs of all the different given for the senior IT competing for attention,
years. Modifications were used shared directories or
user groups and are governance team to and priorities are not clear
made to the original design their importance
perceived to lack empathy constructively challenge IT • Hand-offs and decisions
(e.g. Hardware redundancy • Users perceive that no
with some plans not properly understood by
configuration) without guidance or policy has
• The IT culture is not • IT were not able to team
understanding of been provided for
aligned with user negotiate windows for
consequences appropriate data storage
expectations hence they Disaster Recovery tests
• The importance of tape • IT data archive service is
disengage which is the only way to
backups was underestimated, not known to users
demonstrate the ability to
when these failed intermittently
recreate systems and data
the root cause was not fixed
a complete system
• User Data criticality not
destruction incident.
understood, and important
data was consciously not
backed up on tape
6
© PA Knowledge Limited 2016

These recommendations should be considered in conjunction with any other
remediation activities already planned and a focused programme initiated
Theme Recommendation
• Backup coverage must be reviewed and tested. If necessary tape library capacity increased, even if
only required for an interim period. (Note: Backup system capacity has now been increased)
Technology management
• The Daily Service Review update coverage must be revised and communicated so that all team
members understand the significance to the business of each item in the review.
• Develop and communicate clear policies and provide guidance on how best to use data services
from IT. Ensure that the IT data services are linked to these policies and meet the user requirements.
Data management
• Support this with a coordinated college-wide culture change programme so users do use these
services in the right way.
• The wider College IT governance structure needs to be reviewed and adjusted, decision making
delegated based on complexity, scale and investments.
IT Governance and decision-
• Prioritise and focus on completing the critical things first.
making
• Review the financial model and funding approach for IT investments, aligned with the IT governance.
• Improve communication with the senior stakeholders and encourage them to “own” the decisions.
• IT must build a closer collaborative relationship with the business.
Business relationship
• Adjust the internal IT culture and adopt a relationship based approach for user engagement, less
management
reliant on process alone.
• The culture within the IT teams should move towards a more collaborative approach that is not
heavily reliant on process alone.
IT team management • The IT team members should be educated about the overall technology strategy and roadmap,
priorities made very clear so that they know where they should be focusing effort and how their work
helps the combined IT and College goals.
7
© PA Knowledge Limited 2016

REVIEW FINDINGS
8
© PA Knowledge Limited 2016

The complex architecture at the time of the incident meant the complete failure of
the data storage system required restoration from a variety of sources
• On the flawed assumption that the storage
hardware was very resilient the core College IT
systems and data (1) and file storage (2) were
backed up on a different location of the same
storage unit (3)
• Some of the systems and shared storage were
also backed up to an independent tape unit that
also allowed for offsite storage of backup tapes
(4). This system was overloaded and not all data
was successfully backed up
• Other systems were backed up to a newer
independent storage solution (5) that was located
in a Slough data centre. This performed well
• Some systems and directories were either
inadvertently (e.g. Admissions portal
attachments) or consciously not backed up onto
an independent device
• The Office 365 systems are provided
Simplified summary of King’s College storage infrastructure
independently by Microsoft (6) and were not
impacted
• The KEATS system was hosted on a separate
ULCC infrastructure (7) and was not impacted.
9
© PA Knowledge Limited 2016

Review findings – Technology management
The IT team did not understand the criticality of the tape back ups and did not
ensure that these were reliable
Findings Recommendations
1. This migration of the Data Centre located in the basement of the College’s Strand
building to a new purpose built facility at Slough has taken longer than the initial
estimate of a year. Infrastructure has gained in complexity over time, with • Backup coverage must be reviewed and if necessary
adjustments being made to the original design (e.g. Resiliency of the original HP tape library capacity increased, even if only required
hardware was reduced to deal with performance issues). for an interim period.
2. With the prolonged migration the backup architecture has been in transitional state • The Daily Service Review update coverage must be
for a number of years. Currently a number of backup mechanisms and approaches
revised and communicated so that all team members
are deployed; multiple backup copies are stored on the SAN being backed up with
understand the significance to the business of each
the expectation that it is fault tolerant, newer systems are also backed up on a new
item in the review.
independent backup system, whilst other systems went to an independent but near
end of life tape library. • All systems should be subject to an annual recovery
test to establish it is possible to recreate the system
3. Owing to capacity constraints some shared drives were deliberately never
independently backed up to tape. A conscious decision, without documented and associated data in the event of a destructive
rationale, was made to rely on the volume level back ups within the same storage failure. This is the only way of establishing that the
device (SAN), which was not communicated to data owners. backup systems are functional and that the IT team
and the business understand what is required to
4. In some instances systems and data (e.g. Admissions Portal) were migrated onto the
recover from a severe failure.
new HP hardware and owing to an incomplete understanding of how the systems
worked the tape library was not configured to backup all data.
• The first two recommendations described above
5. Tape backups failed regularly and some folders were not backed up properly for have now been implemented.
several months. Daily Service Review (DSR) updates on the tape back up status
were not being reported correctly (e.g. backups were declared as a success when
they contained repeated failures to back up some shared drives). This was
compounded by the team not comprehending the business criticality of the data
being backed up to tape so these issues were not escalated.
6. The HP technology is complex and at the time of implementation the College
sensibly purchased additional proactive support from HP. This did not provide much
advice on change management or risk assessment. HP subsequently (2015)
introduced enhanced support which they claim would have provided this advice.
10
© PA Knowledge Limited 2016

Review findings – Data management
The consequence of the IT outage was severe as users were unaware they stored
critical data inappropriately and the IT team were unaware of its importance
Findings Recommendations
1. Users unaware they were storing valuable data (e.g. research data,
strategic plans, budgets etc) in inappropriate shared drives (file storage)
• Develop and communicate clear policies and provide
including user-defined systems (eg Access databases)
guidance on how best to use data services from IT.
• Terabytes of static reference data was being backed up daily clogging Ensure that the IT data services are linked to these
up the available tape back up capacity policies and meet the user requirements.
• Faculty admin teams built their own systems with complex data • Initiate a culture change programme within the
connectivities (eg Access database with hard coded links to enterprise College to raise awareness amongst the user
data stores) and stored them in the shared drives, which made it communities and to help them look after their data in
harder for the IT team to achieve service restoration the right way and use the appropriate data services
from the IT team;
2. Users did not know how best to use the IT services to store different
types of data. There is a user perception that no guidance is provided
• Make use of other teams in the College who could
about when to use Sharepoint, OneDrive, shared drives and other cloud
help IT in embedding this culture change, collaborate
storage options or how to request storage or retrieval of archive data
with them more closely (eg Library Services,
3. The data governance strategy and policies are not linked to the Research ethics committee, Data governance and
supporting and enabling IT services. The IT team did not know what strategy committee, Faculty readiness leads etc.)
type of data was being stored by the users in shared drives. Nor did
• Investigate how best to “catalogue” the data and
the IT team have a catalogue or user to folder mapping. All of which
maintain the information – what type of data is stored
hampered the recovery effort
where, who needs it and what is the relative
4. IT naturally focused on the big legacy systems for tape back ups and importance.
de-prioritised the file storage (shared drives). IT did not understand the
risks being accepted as a result nor did they communicate it well to the
user communities.
11
© PA Knowledge Limited 2016

Review findings – Business relationship management
The IT team has an inadequate understanding of the needs of different user groups
Findings Recommendations
1. Over the past four years the IT team have made great efforts to provide
a good and consistent level of service across the College. They have
• King’s must build a closer collaborative relationship
now defined a comprehensive set of processes to support this. The
between its business and IT function, that supplement
user communities prefer a more relationship led approach, so
formal IT governance forums. For example,
unfortunately the focus and reliance on process focus has created a
identifying influential power users across the College
“process wall” that distanced the IT team from user engagement.
and informally discussing ideas for service
2. The user communities find the IT processes too rigorous and too rigid improvements reinforces the partnership ethos that
even for simple things (i.e. small ad hoc projects). This alienates them should exist between IT and the business.
further from IT and encourages shadow IT (e.g. DIY Access databases)
• Adjust the internal culture and move towards an
as the finance and budgeting is devolved to the faculties.
engagement with the users built on closer working
3. Different user groups across the College (faculty admin staff, relationships. Processes are important and they
professional services, academics and students) have different needs. IT should not be thrown away move away from being
teams lack this understanding of the different user groups and their overly reliant on process alone for user engagement.
unique requirements (e.g. IoPPN research data is accumulated over
decades and some research data is generated by specialist devices
such as MRI scanners).
4. Without a dialogue users can’t provide the relevant feedback to IT on
proposed solutions and help define the business requirements that
would then support infrastructure design decisions. Consequently IT
are having to infer requirements without acknowledgment or
expectation setting with the business. (e.g. IoPPN research data has
complex confidentiality requirements which apparently cannot be
implemented on the new collaboration solutions).
12
© PA Knowledge Limited 2016

Review findings – IT Governance and decision making
IT team has not been able to engage the College in IT governance sufficiently to
