# BBC Online outage on Saturday 19th July 2014

Tuesday 22 July 2014, 19:12

Richard Cooper

Hi, I\'m Richard Cooper, the BBC\'s Controller of Digital Distribution
for BBC Future Media.

As many of you will have noticed we suffered a serious incident over the
weekend which impacted BBC iPlayer, BBC iPlayer Radio, and audio and
video playback on other parts of [bbc.co.uk](http://www.bbc.co.uk/). We
also had to use our emergency homepage for prolonged periods of time.

Here's what happened.

We have a system comprising 58 application servers and 10 database
servers that provides programme and clip metadata. This data powers
various BBC iPlayer applications for the devices that we support (which
is over 1200 and counting) as well as modules of programme information
and clips on many sites across BBC Online. This system is split across
two data centres in a \"hot-hot\" configuration (both running at the
same time), with the expectation that we can run at any time from either
one of those data centres.

At 9.30 on Saturday morning (19th July 2014) the load on the database
went through the roof, meaning that many requests for metadata to the
application servers started to fail.

The immediate impact of this depended on how each product uses that
data. In many cases the metadata is cached at the product level, and can
continue to serve content while attempting to revalidate. In some cases
(mostly older applications), the metadata is used directly, and so those
products started to fail.

At almost the same time we had a second problem. We use a caching layer
in front of most of the products on BBC Online, and one of the pools
failed. The products managed by that pool include BBC iPlayer and the
BBC homepage, and the failure made all of those products inaccessible.
That opened up a major incident at the same time on a second front.

Our first priority was to restore the caching layer. The failure was a
complex one (we're still doing the forensics on it), and it has repeated
a number of times. It was this failure that resulted in us switching the
homepage to its emergency mode ("Due to technical problems, we are
displaying a simplified version of the BBC Homepage"). We used the
emergency page a number of times during the weekend, eventually leaving
it up until we were confident that we had completely stabilised the
cache.

Restoring the metadata service was complex. Isolating the source of the
additional load proved to be far from straightforward, and restoring the
service itself is not as simple as rebooting it (turning it off and on
again is the ultimate solution to most problems). Performance of the
system remained sufficiently poor that in the end we decided to do some
significant remedial work on Saturday afternoon, which ran on until the
evening. During that period, BBC iPlayer was effectively not useable.

After that work was complete we were in a walking wounded state that
allowed close to normal operation for much of the site, though BBC
iPlayer remained down on a number of devices. We chose to run it in this
mode throughout the rest of the weekend while planning a full
restoration of the service. By the time we were ready to do that we were
entering the peak period on Sunday evening, so rather than risk the
service further, we chose instead to do it on Monday morning.

We recognise that during this incident, with BBC iPlayer unavailable for
some periods for some users you may not have been able to watch or
listen to the programmes you wanted. I'm afraid we can't simply turn
back the clock, and as such the availability for you to watch some
programmes in the normal seven day catch-up window was reduced.
Essentially programmes aired on Saturday 12th July and Sunday 13th July
were not available this last weekend for some users. It\'s small
consolation but that was the weekend of the World Cup Final, Scottish
Open, Women\'s Open and other live sporting events which are less likely
to be viewed on catch-up. I should also stress that programmes aired
this weekend - when the problems occurred - are available now on BBC
iPlayer.

BBC iPlayer is an incredibly popular product, last year alone we had 3
billion requests and instances like this are incredibly rare.

We will now be completing the forensics to make sure that we've fully
understood the root causes, and put in place the measures necessary to
minimise the chances of such interruptions in the future.

We\'re sorry for the inconvenience.

*Richard Cooper is Controller of Digital Distribution, BBC Future Media*

