to elicit only the evidence that supports our story.
Getting at the “how” and not the “why” of what happened will help you create a picture of all the
things that were happening around the incident, as opposed to a fabricated cause-and-effect
chain that gets created after the fact by virtue of hindsight.
This simple substitution will help you discover descriptions instead of explanations from
participants. This is important because explanations tend to be reductive or defensive and
usually scare the learning away. While they can be messy and involve confusion or incongruity,
descriptions are necessary for building the rich context for the event, which is the reason why
everyone is gathered together in the first place.
In general, you want to ask questions that reveal:
• Cues that lead people to make observations
• Context for assessments or judgments
• Rationales for choices or decisions
• Things that people know (and might assume are common knowledge)
• People’s states of mind at the time
• Mental models for how things “should” work
• Factors that led people to take a specific action
• Signals that bring people to ask for help
20

Etsy 2016 Debriefing Facilitation Guide
Here’s what this can look like:
Someone makes an observation Ask about the cues they picked up
“It seemed a little off.” • What specifically made you think
that it seemed off?
• What were you seeing/hearing/
smelling at the time?
Someone makes an assessment or Ask about how they arrived at that
judgment about now or the future
“It was broken.” • How could you tell?
• When did you first notice?
• What tipped you off?
Someone explicitly made a choice Ask about any options they considered
or decision
“So I decided to page the person oncall.” • What brought you to that decision?
• Have you ever done this in the past?
• Have you ever NOT made this
decision in the past under similar
circumstances?
21

Etsy 2016 Debriefing Facilitation Guide
Someone says “I knew…” Ask them how they knew it
“I knew that I had to get it fixed before I left • How did you know?
work for the day.” • Was this something you had been
told, or had happened in the past?
• Have you seen other people stay late
to fix similar issues?
Someone mentions something about Ask them what other external factors
their state of mind were in play at the time
“It was frustrating that I couldn’t find the • What else was going on to make you
password for the account.” feel frustrated?
• When did you first notice feeling
frustrated?
Someone explains their mental model for Ask them to talk about what normal work
how things usually happen looks or feels like
“Usually when I press this button, the • Do you always turn on the machine
machine turns on.” that way?
• What usually happens next, or right
before?
• Are there other ways to turn the
machine on?
22

Etsy 2016 Debriefing Facilitation Guide
Someone talks about an action they took Ask them about alternatives
“I pushed this bit of code that would take • Were there other courses of action
things offline while we figured out a more available to you at the time?
long-term solution.” • What sorts of pressure were you
under at this time?
Someone mentions asking for help Ask them about the point at which they
decided to ask for help
“After about twenty minutes, I paged the • Was there something that brought
database team….” you to page the team then,
specifically?
• How did you know that was the team
you needed to page? Is there some
guide you use? Some rule of thumb?
Probe for the Invisible Parts of Expertise
“Experts in making diagnoses are not necessarily experts in explaining
their process of diagnosis.” (Michalski & Chilausky, 1980, p. 63)
What people notice, investigate, focus on, dismiss, or discover before, during, or even after an
event is not always apparent to others, or even themselves. They’ll make judgments about these
things they notice: Is it abnormal? Is it worth paying more attention to? Will it become more or less
important later? When it comes to reacting to the information they take in, some of those reactions
are part of their “muscle memory.”
In fact, a great deal of what comprises expertise is tacit knowledge. Our role as facilitators is to help
draw out whatever bits of this “invisible” mental space as we can from participants.
A rich way of unearthing this tacit (or hidden) knowledge that people have is to target their
assumptions, expectations, and judgments with your questions:
23

Etsy 2016 Debriefing Facilitation Guide
How Do They “See” Typicality?
When we find a point where people were surprised, we can try to understand what their
expectations were before they encountered the surprise. This means we need to get at what
“normal” looks like for them. Some questions that are useful here are:
• “How did you judge that this situation was ‘normal?”
• “When did you first notice that things didn’t look right to you?”
• “In your gut, did this feel just about right?”
• “At this point, do you remember feeling confident about what was happening?”
How Do They “See” Distinctions?
Another hallmark of expertise also includes the ability to perceive specific differences in seemingly
identical scenarios. When experts are looking through multiple sources of data (logs, graphs,
observations relayed by their colleagues, etc.) they can sometimes see things that others might not.
Questions that can be helpful in this vein are:
• “What was it about that metric that brought you to look closer at the issue?”
• “Is there something special about this error log that others might not know?”
• “What things do you look for when you suspect that this type of failure mode is in play?”
How Do They “See” the Future Unfolding?
Another primary component of expertise is the ability to mentally simulate the state or picture of a
changing process, and consider what pitfalls or opportunities might lie ahead. Some questions that
can help people describe this might be:
• “Tell me how you think about which change to make when you see these errors.”
• “Did you try out different options in your mind about what to do? What were they?”
• “Can you draw a diagram (hand them a dry-erase marker) about what you remember thinking
the system was doing, and what you thought your options were to change it?”
• “How do you anticipate if the situation is getting worse, requiring you to take some action?”
Ask Dumb Questions
When in doubt, or if you get lost, you can always ask dumb questions. In fact, asking dumb
questions is part of your job. You are in a unique position of not risking ridicule by jumping in and
asking someone to explain what they mean by “database sharding” or “full stack.”
24

Etsy 2016 Debriefing Facilitation Guide
Plus, there is a huge side benefit of the dumb question tactic: It puts the person doing the
explaining into a position of showcasing their expertise, which is a nice place to be. It also provides
insight to the entire group about the tacit knowledge wrapped up in something that we might talk
about or interact with all the time but have very different ideas of what it actually means.
The art of debrief facilitation revolves around taking turns leading and following what’s happening
in the room. You are looking to create the conditions that essentially transport people back in time
so they can speak honestly about what was going on inside and around them when they did what
they did.
“The perspective from the inside of the tunnel. This is the point of view of people in the unfolding
situation. To them, the outcome was not known (or they would have done something else). They
contributed to the sequence of events because of what they saw on the inside of the unfolding
situation. To understand ‘human error,’ you have to take this perspective.” (Dekker, 2014)
Your goal is to create a space for people to understand the incident from a different perspective,
and to gain a deeper understanding of how other people do their work on account of the diverse
contexts in which we all operate.
For all the participants in the room listening, the sheer act of witnessing these perspectives
enables them to empathize, making them better teammates and contributing to the wider
organizational expertise.
When to Dig in More
One of the most challenging and nuanced components of debrief facilitation is sorting out the
narrative threads in a discussion and determining which one to tug in order to help the whole
story unravel.
As the group walks through a timeline and questions are asked and descriptions given, the
facilitator has to decide when to go deeper into a particular area (“zoom in”) and when to pull
back to the greater timeline context (“zoom out”).
25

Etsy 2016 Debriefing Facilitation Guide
A solid cue that digging deeper with questions might be valuable is when a participant alludes to
part of a description that they believe is “common knowledge.” For example:
“…of course I didn’t want to pull it from the load balancer
that way, obviously.”
When you get an answer like, it’s a great signal to ask what brings them to think the judgment they
made was obvious. Gauge the rest of the group:
“Is making this call not to pull it from the load balancer that way
obvious to everyone?”
Remember that your role as a facilitator is to get people to say things out loud that they normally
might not. If someone believes a decision to be obvious, that’s a great opportunity to validate their
belief with the group.
You’ll also be presented with moments where it’s necessary to do the opposite: to zoom out and
ask about connections between perspectives. This can happen when the discussion is veering
too much into the weeds and away from what you’ve identified as crucial points in the timeline. In
these instances it can be useful to ask people to step back from the day-to-day and consider the
hand-off moments, where work is transitioned between people or teams, and where the potential
for misunderstanding is high. You can do this by asking something like:
“How much of this is new information for people in the room?”
“How many of you in the room were aware of all the moving
pieces here?”
Approaching your debriefing with a true “beginner’s mind” will enable all the people in the room
with you to follow suit.
Make no mistake: Knowing when to “zoom in” or “zoom out” is challenging. The good news: It gets
easier with practice.
26

Etsy 2016 Debriefing Facilitation Guide
How Do You Know If You’ve Succeeded?
We have come to think about two very basic success metrics when it comes to facilitating
debriefings: the acquisition of new information that affects future work; and attendees’ willingness
to participate in future debriefings.
In order to collect some sort of evidence of these metrics, we have put the following thresholds
in place:
• Did at least one person learn one thing that will affect how they work in the future?
• Did at least half of the attendees say they would attend another debrief in the future?
If the answer to both of these is yes, then the facilitator can consider it a job well done.
Pro Tip: Pause at intervals during debrief discussions and ask people to raise their hands if
they have learned something they didn’t know before. Invariably, hands will raise, eyes will
look around, and heads will nod. This exercise can serve as proof positive of the meaningful
experiences created in that room.
There are two factors at play when it comes to creating widespread perception that debriefings
are time well spent. The first is the values and culture of your organization, and the second is
what happens in the room. Perception of both factors is crucial, and as a facilitator you have the
power to affect them both with the questions you ask. You are there to give the people doing the
work a voice, but in order for them to speak candidly, they have to feel safe—not just in the room,
but in the community. Fear of retribution or punishment (even the subtle social kind) will silence
participants. Without this 5, it is nearly impossible to have effective debriefings.
There is never one right question, and your inquiry skills will develop over time and with practice.
It’s important to rely on what is at play in the room (Are there confused looks? Was that an eyeroll?),
as well as your gut. As Klein says, “Curiosity should be your geiger counter.”
5 Because this document focuses on practical instructions for facilitation, we are not delving into the “Just Culture”
concept, but you can read all about it in Sidney Dekker’s book Just Culture: Balancing Safety and Accountability.
http://www.betterworldbooks.com/just-culture-balancing-safety-and-accountability-id-9780754672678.aspx
27

Etsy 2016 Debriefing Facilitation Guide
Conclusion
At Etsy, we believe that when failures happen, we have a simple choice to make:
• Do we want to react to this failure from a place of hindsight and judgment of people’s actions
and decisions taken out of context?
• Or do we want to truly learn from the event by giving voice to the diverse perspectives and
stories of the people closest to the work?
It should be obvious at this point, but we choose the latter option.
We hope this guide can help you develop the capacity to support that choice in your organization
too. By doing so, you’ll build a container for learning that enables people to bear witness to the
complexity of the work being done around them every single day. By making the effort to facilitate
effective debriefings, you are providing countless, invaluable opportunities to learn and develop
expertise within your organization. Thank you for making that effort.
28

Etsy 2016 Debriefing Facilitation Guide
References
Allspaw, John C. “Blameless PostMortems and a Just Culture.” Code as Craft. N.p., 22 May 2016.
Web. 01 Sept. 2016.
Dekker, Sidney W. (2002) Reconstructing Human Contributions to Accidents: The New View on
Error and Performance. Journal of Safety Research 33.3 (2002): 371–85.
Dekker, S. (2014). The field guide to understanding ’human error’. Ashgate Publishing, Ltd..
Etsy, Inc. (2015). Form S1 2015. Retrieved from SEC EDGAR website http://www.sec.gov/edgar.shtml
Etsy. (2013). Etsy/morgue. Retrieved from https://github.com/etsy/morgue
Hollnagel, E. (2009). The ETTO principle: efficiency-thoroughness trade-off: why things that go
right sometimes go wrong. Ashgate Publishing, Ltd.
Klein, G., & Hoffman (1993). Seeing the invisible: The perceptual cognitive aspects of expertise.
Cognitive science foundations of instruction, 203–226.
Shorrock, S. (2014, November 17), Life After Human Error - Velocity Europe 2014 [Video file].
Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=STU3Or6ZU60
Smith, J. (2016, January 14). 72% of people get their best ideas in the shower—here’s why. Retrieved
from http://www.businessinsider.com/why-people-get-their-best-ideas-in-the-
shower-2016-1
USDA Forest Service (2014) Coordinated Response Protocol/Learning Review Guide, USDA Forest
Service
Dekker, Sidney (2014). The Field Guide to Understanding ‘Human Error’ (p. 81). Ashgate Publishing
Ltd. Kindle Edition.
29

Contact
press@etsy.com
legal@etsy.com
117 Adams Street
Brooklyn, NY 11201
This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International License.
To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/ or send a letter to
Creative Commons, PO Box 1866, Mountain View, CA 94042, USA.
