AAIB Bulletin: 4/2021 G-TAWG AAIB-26814
SERIOUS INCIDENT
Aircraft Type and Registration: Boeing 737-8K5, G-TAWG
No & Type of Engines: 2 CFM56-7B27E turbofan engines
Year of Manufacture: 2012 (Serial no: 37266)
Date & Time (UTC): 21 July 2020 at 0500 hrs
Location: Birmingham Airport
Type of Flight: Commercial Air Transport (Passenger)
Persons on Board: Crew - 6 Passengers - 187
Injuries: Crew - None Passengers - None
Nature of Damage: None
Commander’s Licence: Airline Transport Pilot’s Licence
Commander’s Age: 41 years
Commander’s Flying Experience: 10,262 hours (of which 2,615 were on type)
Last 90 days - 16 hours
Last 28 days - 13 hours
Information Source: Aircraft Accident Report Form submitted by the
pilot and information from the operator
Synopsis
The operator had suspended operations for several months due to Covid-19 restrictions, and
prior to the incident flight the reservation system from which the load sheet was produced
had been upgraded. There was a fault in the system which, when a female passenger
checked in for the flight and used or was given the title ‘Miss’, caused the system checked
her in as a child. The system allocated them a child’s standard weight of 35 kg as opposed
to the correct female standard weight of 69 kg. Consequently, with 38 females checked in
incorrectly and misidentified as children, the G-TAWG takeoff mass from the load sheet was
1,244 kg below the actual mass of the aircraft.
Following this serious incident, the operator introduced a daily check to ensure adult
females were referred to as Ms on the relevant documentation, with a secondary check by
Operations staff against passenger loads. A more formal system of checks was introduced
on 24 July 2020.
History of the flight
General
The operator was the UK associated regional arm of a large European company, with a
number of operating bases at major and regional airports within the UK. On 10 July 2020,
three adult females were checked in for a flight as children. The reason was identified
© Crown copyright 2021 84 All times are UTC

AAIB Bulletin: 4/2021 G-TAWG AAIB-26814
as the use of the title ‘Miss’, which the system interpreted as a child and not as an adult,
equivalent to a weight difference of 34 kg. Action was taken to correct the problem, and the
situation was monitored. On 21 July 2020, three flights by three different aircraft from the
same operator departed from the UK with inaccurate load sheets caused by the same issue.
G-TAWG was the first of the three to take off, at 0500 hrs from Birmingham International
Airport.
The flight crew had two documents available to them: the flight plan showing the route and
planning information with predicted takeoff weight; and a load sheet providing the actual
weight and distribution of the passengers, including additional weight such as cargo, from
which aircraft performance was calculated. Procedures for how these documents were
used were set out in the airline’s Operations Manual.
The incident flight
The aircraft was to depart on a scheduled flight from Birmingham International Airport
to Palma de Mallorca airport (PMI), Spain. The weather at 0450 hrs, 10 minutes before
departure, was wind calm, CAVOK, OAT 8°C, dew point 6°C and QNH 1026 hPa. As part
of the prestart procedure, the flight crew reviewed the flight plan, which gave an expected
takeoff weight (TOW) of 66,495 kg (Figure 1), and the load sheet, which gave a TOW
of 64,889 kg (Figure 2). They noticed that there was a discrepancy, with the load sheet
showing 1,606 kg less than the flight plan. They noted that the number of children shown on
the load sheet was higher than expected, at 65, compared to the 29 which were expected on
the flight plan. The commander recalled thinking that the number was high but plausible; he
had experienced changing loads on the run-up to the temporary grounding1 as passengers
cancelled and altered trips at short notice.
Figure 1
Flight plan weights and passengers
Footnote
1 As a result of the imposition of Covid-19 restrictions.
© Crown copyright 2021 85 All times are UTC

AAIB Bulletin: 4/2021 G-TAWG AAIB-26814
Figure 2
Load sheet weights and passengers
He remarked that variances between actual and expected Zero Fuel Weight (ZFW)2 were
not uncommon. A further issue with the load sheet on the flight was the baggage load,
which had been calculated as 35 bags at a standard mass of 16 kg, and 150 bags whose
actual masses averaged 14.5 kg per bag. This was an unusual occurrence, but the use of
actual masses was permitted by the Operations Manual. The commander also took care to
check the load sheet taxi fuel was correct, as he had noticed a discrepancy with the flight
plan statistical taxi fuel3. After a brief discussion, the flight crew decided that they were
content with the load sheet, the actual bag weights being very close to standard and the
new ZFW being understood as a function of the differing passenger load.
The flight crew followed the normal procedure to calculate takeoff performance independently
using the Boeing Onboard Performance Tool (OPT). With a light and variable wind, they
elected to use a 5 kt tailwind with the load sheet data to compute takeoff performance.
Nothing unusual was noticed by the crew on departure and the flight continued normally to
the destination.
Subsequent use of the actual takeoff weight for performance calculations showed that all
departure airspeeds should have been one knot greater than those used on the incident
flight, and the thrust required should have been 88.9% N compared to the 88.3% N set
1 1
on the incident flight. The screen displays from the Boeing OPT are shown in Figure 3,
with the incorrect load sheet takeoff weight on the left and the correct takeoff weight on the
right. The resulting one knot difference in takeoff speeds (V , V and V ) can be seen in the
1 2 R
bottom right of each screenshot, and the different takeoff thrusts on the bottom left.
A calculation was carried out for the actual TOW and environmental conditions, using a calm
wind rather than assuming a 5 knot tailwind. The result showed that a thrust of 88.2% N
1
would have been required to meet regulatory requirements.
The crew procedure for performance planning is set out at Figure 4.
Footnote
2 The Zero Fuel Weight is the weight of the aircraft fully loaded with crew, passengers, bags and freight with only
the weight of the fuel to be added.
3 Statistical taxi fuel is a statistical prediction of the fuel expected to be used for taxiing based on previous
departures.
© Crown copyright 2021 86 All times are UTC

AAIB Bulletin: 4/2021 G-TAWG AAIB-26814
Figure 3
Boeing Onboard Planning Tool performance data
Figure 4
Performance planning procedure
© Crown copyright 2021 87 All times are UTC

AAIB Bulletin: 4/2021 G-TAWG AAIB-26814
The Ground Operations Manual sets out the actions to be taken should any last-minute
changes (LMC) above a certain value be made to the payload (Figure 5).
Figure 5
Last-minute change weight limit
Airline IT system
Part of the operator’s IT system was an integrated check-in system, which was undergoing
an upgrade as part of a wider system upgrade for the airline industry.
Prior to the upgrade being implemented, users were involved in considering any risks that
might occur as part of the upgrade and, during User Acceptance Testing (UAT), the system
functioned as expected. In some of the training meetings held in London in February 2020,
the different titles for passengers, such as Mr, Mrs and Dr, used by the various markets, had
been discussed in relation to standard IATA usage. The relationship between a passenger’s
title and the standard weight allocated was not discussed. No specific test scenarios looking
at passenger titles were examined in the UAT.
On the first flight after the upgraded system was implemented, an adult female passenger
was checked in for a flight as a child and was also shown on the load sheet as a child. This
was spotted by the flight dispatcher and the operator’s systems delivery manager. A check
of the flight revealed two other cases where the same error had occurred. No safety or
ground operations reports were submitted about this occurrence.
The system programming was not carried out in the UK, and in the country where it was
performed the title Miss was used for a child, and Ms for an adult female, hence the error.
A manual solution for correcting the problem was quickly identified that involved a team
identifying upcoming flights, checking each booking, and changing all adult females with
the title ‘Miss’ to ‘Ms’, which overcame the problem. Subsequently, this work was shared
between two teams, and the process was completed every afternoon and evening for the
next day’s flights. It was checked again every morning, where possible, before flights
departed.
As a further mitigation measure, Ground Operations had requested that the check-in-staff
pay particular attention to female passengers and double check that they showed in the
system as females and not as children when they presented themselves at the check-in
desk or at the gate. This request was sent out electronically to all ground stations. This
was initially a recommendation, as it was not prescribed in the Ground Operations Manual.
© Crown copyright 2021 88 All times are UTC

AAIB Bulletin: 4/2021 G-TAWG AAIB-26814
The upgrade programmers adapted a piece of software, which changed the title of any adult
female from Miss to Ms automatically, and this was implemented on 17 July 2020. This
adaptation was only capable of changing bookings before check-in. Any passenger bookings
with the title Miss already checked in, including online up to 24 hours before departure,
would not be amended. On 20 July 2020, the programmer was making enhancements to
the program to improve its performance. This should not have stopped the program from
working, but as this was a ‘fix’, it could not be known for sure.
A combination of the teams not working over the weekend and the ‘online’ check-in being
open early on Monday 20 July, 24 hours ahead of the flight, meant the incorrectly allocated
passenger weights were not corrected.
Analysis
The incident occurred due to a simple flaw in the programming of the IT system, which was
due to the meaning of the title ‘Miss’ being interpreted by the system as a child and not an
adult female. This was because in the country where the system was programmed, Miss is
a child and Ms is an adult female. This issue had not been identified as part of the initial risk
analysis and did not manifest itself during the trial simulations. For the incident flight, the
weight of passengers on the load sheet was below the actual weight of the passengers by
1,244 kg, which was more than the 500 kg LMC weight difference above which a new load
sheet should have been produced, had the weight discrepancy been identified.
When the issue was first identified, the operator had instigated Safety Action to prevent an
incorrect load sheet being produced and used for aircraft performance planning. However,
the work of correcting the adult females wrongly listed as children was handled by teams
that were not working over the weekend. Passengers were able to check in online 24 hours
before departure, on 20 July 2020. On this day, a software ‘fix’ was being applied to the
system, possibly preventing it from identifying incorrect passenger status before the incident
flight on 21 July.
Whilst an incorrect takeoff weight was used for aircraft performance planning, the thrust
required for the actual TOW and environmental conditions (88.2% N ) was marginally less
1
than the thrust used for the takeoff (88.3% N ). This meant the safe operation of the aircraft
1
was not compromised.
Conclusion
A flaw in the IT system used by the operator to produce the load sheet, meant that an
incorrect takeoff weight was passed to the flight crew. As a result, the aircraft departed with
a takeoff weight 1,244 kg more than stated on the load sheet. An upgrade of the system
producing load sheets was carried out to prevent reoccurrence.
© Crown copyright 2021 89 All times are UTC

AAIB Bulletin: 4/2021 G-TAWG AAIB-26814
Safety action
Following this serious incident, the operator took action to prevent re-occurrence:
● A member of the Systems team manually checked the flights daily to ensure
that the title ‘Miss’ was amended to ‘Ms’.
● A secondary check was instigated with the Operations department against
the booked passenger loads.
● A reminder briefing was given to Ground Handling Agents to ask them to
be alert at check-in or during boarding for any adult female passengers
showing as Miss or a child.
● A formalised procedure for a Customer Care Executive to check bookings
was instituted on 24 July 2020.
© Crown copyright 2021 90 All times are UTC