Calculating Availability – The Three Rs
December2006
Introduction
In our previous two articles on calculating availability, we focused on redundant systems that
could suffer two or more subsystem failures depending upon how many subsystem spares were
provided. We assumed that if the system went down because it had lost all of its spare
subsystems plus one more, it could be returned to service as soon as the first failed subsystem
wasrepaired.
However,thingsaremorecomplicatedthanthisinactive/activesystems.Notonlymustanode(a
subsystem)berepaired,butitmustberecovered,andthesystemrestoredtoanoperationalstate
beforeservicesareonceagainbeingprovidedtotheusers.
InourfirstarticleonCalculatingAvailability–RedundantSystems,wederivedthebasic
availabilityequationforanactive/activesystem:
MTR
F f(1a)s1 (1)
MTBF
where
F istheprobabilityoffailureforthesystem.
MTR isthemeantimetorepairthesystem(itsaveragerepairtime).
MTBF isthemeantimebeforefailureofthesystem(itsaverageuptime).
a istheavailabilityofanode(theproportionofthetimethatitisup).
s isthenumberofsparesinthesystem(ittakesthefailureofs+1nodes
totakedownthesystem).
f isthenumberofwaysthats+1nodescanfail(thenumberoffailure
modes).
In our previous article on Calculating Availability– Repair Strategies, we explored the differences
between parallel and sequential repair strategies on system availability. When compared to
sequential repair, we showed that parallel repair reduces the probability of failure for a singly-
spared system by a factor of two and for a dually-spared system by a factor of six [basically
(s+1)!],wheresisthenumberofspares].
These relations were based on the assumption that following a system failure, as soon as any
one of the failed nodes was repaired, it was returned to service; and the system was up and
running.
1
©2006SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

The Three Rs
However, getting the system up and running is more than just a matter of repairing one of the
failednodes.Infact,therearethree“r”stoconsiderrelativetoreturningthesystemtoservice:1
 repair–Thefaultthatcausedthenodetofailmustberepaired.Thisusuallyentailsa
hardwarereplacement.
 recovery – Once the node is repaired, it must be recovered. This might require that
the software environment be reloaded, the applications started, and the databases
be opened, among other tasks. Upon the completion of node recovery, system
restorationcanbegin.
 restore – Once one of the failed nodes is fully recovered, the system has the node
complement that it needs to be put back into service.. In some cases,service can be
restored to the users at this time. However, this may not always be true. For
example, the failed node’s database will usually have to be resynchronized with the
surviving databases. In some cases, a backlog of manually-completed transactions
mayhavetobeenteredbeforesystem operationcanbeconsideredtoberestored to
itsnormalstate.
network system
node
operations
operations
1.RepairNode 2.RecoverNode
3.RestoreSystem
HardwareRepair
In our previous article, we considered two nodal repair strategies, sequential repair and parallel
repair:
Under the parallel repair strategy, service technicians are dispatched to all failed nodes and
repairthemsimultaneously.Thefirstnodethatisrepairedreturnsthesystemtoservice.
Under the sequential repair strategy, there is only one service technician, who repairs the nodes
one at a time.When he has completed the repair of the first node, the system can be returned to
service.
Thisledtothefollowingrulesforrepairstrategy:
1
Theimpactofrepair,recovery,and restoreonavailabilityisdiscussedinmoredetailintheforthcomingbook,Breaking
theAvailabilityBarrier:AchievingCenturyUptimeswithActive/ActiveSystems,byPaulJ.Holenstein,Dr.BillHighleyman,
andDr.BruceHolenstein.
2
©2006SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Parallel Repair Failure Probability Advantage Rule: If there are s spares configured for
the system, parallel repair will reduce system failover probability by a factor of (s+1)! as
comparedtosequentialrepair.
Parallel Repair MTR Advantage Rule: If there are s spares configured for the system,
parallel repair will reduce system MTR by a factor of (s+1) as compared to sequential
repair.
Parallel Repair MTBF Advantage Rule: If there are s spares configured for the system,
parallel repair will increase system MTBF by a factor of s! as compared to sequential
repair.
We derived availability relations for these cases. The relationships for the singly-spared systems
are
n(n1)
F (1a)2 forparallelrepairandonesparenode (2)
2
Fn(n1)(1a)2 forsequentialrepairandonesparenode (3)
where
F istheprobabilityoffailurefortheactive/activesystem.
a istheavailabilityofanode.
n isthenumberofnodesinthesystem.
NodeRecovery
In the above analysis, we focused extensivelyon one of the three “r”s – repair.We assumed that
onceanodewasrepaired,itwasreadytobeputbackintoservice.
If things were only that simple. For once the node is repaired, it must next be recovered before it
can be returned to service and the system returned to operation. Even then, there may be more
workrequiredbeforeservicecanberestoredtotheusers.
Recovery of a failed node generally requires many steps and can take hours. Though perhaps
notanexhaustivelist,thesestepsmayinclude:
 Theapplicationenvironments(suchastransactionmonitors)mustbebroughtup.
 Theapplicationsmustberestarted.
 Theapplicationsmustopentheirdatabases.
 Thenodemustbereconnectedtothenetwork.
 Theproperoperationoftherepairednodemustbeverified.
Only after all of these steps (and perhaps others) have been completed can the node be put into
serviceandthesystemrestoretasksbegun.
The node’s mean time to repair, mtr, is the amount of time that the node is down and is the sum
of the node’s repair time plus its recovery time. Thus, nodal recovery time adds directly to the
nodal hardware repair time to arrive at the node’s mean time to repair. That is, the mean time to
repair a node, its mtr, is the sum of its hardware repair time and its recovery time. These are the
tasksthattherepairpersonmustaccomplishbeforehehascompletedhisrepairofthenode:
3
©2006SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

noderepairtime(mtr)=hardwarerepairtimeplusnoderecoverytime
SystemRestore
Once one of the failed nodes has been recovered, the system is in a position to be brought back
online. However, before it can be put into full use, there are still some tasks that may have to be
accomplished. For instance, the database of the failed node will probably have to be
resynchronized with the surviving database copies. Furthermore, theremayhave been a backlog
of transactions, manually entered during the system outage, which must be reentered before the
system can be put into normal operation. Finally, users may have to be rebalanced across the
network.
These we define as system restore tasks. They differ from node recovery tasks in that there are
no parallel efforts being made to accomplish these tasks, unlike node recovery tasks which are
beingundertakenbyrepairpersonnelateachofthefailednodesifparallelrepairisbeingused.
Tosimplifymathematicalnotation,letusreplacemtrwithr:
r=mtr=nodalrepairtime=hardwarerepairtime+noderecoverytime
We know from our analysis in our previous article that under parallel repair, the average time to
get the first node repaired is r /(s+1), where s is the number of spare nodes. The system MTR is
the sum of the average nodal repair time plus the time to accomplish the system restoration
tasks.LetuscallthetimerequiredtoaccomplishthesystemrestoretasksR.Then
MTRr/(s1)R forparallelrepair (4)
where
MTR is the system mean time to repair. It is the time from the last node
failuretothetimethatservicesarerestoredtotheusers.
r is the nodal repair time (hardware repair time plus node recovery
time).
s isthenumberofsparenodes.
R isthesystemrestorationtime.
In the introduction above, we repeated the availability equation derived in our previous article for
repaironly:
MTR
F f(1a)s1 (1)
MTBF
In our previous analysis for parallel repair, MTR = r /(s+1). However, we must now adjust this
equation to reflect the more accurate value of MTR as given by Equation (4). Since the system
failure probability is proportional to MTR, the previously calculated failure probability expressed
byEquation(1)mustbeincreasedbythefactor
r/(s1)R
r/(s1)
andtherefore,2
2
TheserelationshipsareformallyderivedinAppendix3,FailoverFaultModels,BreakingtheAvailabilityBarrier:
SurvivableSystemsforEnterpriseComputing,byDr.BillHighleyman,PaulJ.Holenstein,andDr.BruceHolenstein.
4
©2006SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

r/(s1)R
F f(1a)s1 forparallelrepair (5)
r/(s1)
Forasingly-sparedsystem(s=1)withparallelrepair,thisbecomes
r/2Rn(n1)
F (1a)2 forparallelrepairandonesparenode (6)
r/2 2
Forsequentialrepair,MTR=r+R.Followingtheaboveargument,weobtain
rR
F f(1a)s1 forsequentialrepair (7)
r
Forasingly-sparedsystemwithsequentialrepair,thisbecomes
rR
F n(n1)(1a)2 forsequentialrepairandonesparenode (8)
r
InEquations(5)through(8),
F istheprobabilityoffailureoftheactive/activesystem.
a istheavailabilityofanode.
r istherepairtimeforanode(hardwarerepairplusrecovery).
R isthesystemrestorationtime.
n isthenumberofnodesinthesystem.
s isthenumberofsparenodesprovidedforthesystem.
f isthenumberofwaysthats+1outofnnodescanfail
Which Are Recovery Tasks and Which Are Restore Tasks?
Theremaybesomeconfusionas towhetherataskshouldbeincludedinnoderecovery
timer orinsystem restoretimeR.TheanswertothisquandaryisgivenbyEquation(5).
Forparallelrepair,ifataskisbeingdonebyarepairtechnicianatonenodesite,similartasksare
beingdonebyrepairtechniciansattheotherrepairsites.Inthiscase,thetaskbecomespartof
nodalrepairandenjoysthe1/(s+1)economyofparallelrepair.Therefore,itisanoderecovery
taskandisincludedinthenoderepairtimerasarecoverytask.
However,ifitisataskthatisdonecentrallyoncethefirstnodeisrecovered,itdoesnotbenefitby
parallelrepairandisincludedinthesystemrestoretimeR.
For instance, loading the applications into a node is definitely a task that is accomplished by the
repairtechnicianattherepairsite.Therefore,itcontributestonoderecoverytime.
Reenteringbackloggedtransactionsisanonparallelactivityandisasystemrestoretask.
Synchronizing the failed node’s database may either by done by the repair technician on-site or
maybedonebycentraloperationspersonnel.Intheformercase,itisanoderecoverytaskandis
includedinr.Inthelattercase,itisasystemrestoretaskandisincludedinR.
5
©2006SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Note that if sequential repair is used, there is no parallel advantage. As seen by Equation (7),
there is no difference between a nodal recovery task and a system restore task so far as the
system failure probability F is concerned. This is because all tasks are being done one at a time
anyway.
Summary
We have explained why simply repairing one of the downed nodes is insufficient to return the
system to service. The node must also be recovered, and some actions requiring use of the fully
functional system may be needed before service to the users can be restored. The availability
relationsforthesecasesaregiveninEquations(5)through(8).
6
©2006SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
