IRS Goof Costs U.S. Taxpayers $300m +
January2007
The IRS (the Internal Revenue Service, which is responsible for collecting taxes in the U.S.)
managedtodecommissionitsfrauddetectionsystemforalmostallof2006beforeitsnewsystem
was even tested. The new system subsequently failed its tests with the result that an estimated
$300,000,000 or more in fraudulent or improper income tax refunds for tax returns filed in 2005
was paid. This comes out of the American taxpayers’ pocket. How could the IRS have let this
happen?1
The IRS Fraud Detection System
Operational since 1995 and managed by Computer Sciences Corp. (CSC), the Web-based IRS
Electronic Fraud Detection System is the second largest repository of taxpayer data in the
Department of the Treasury. It holds every filed tax return that claims a
refund. Its purpose is to flag potentially fraudulent or improper returns for
IRSaudit.
Inthelastfew years,thissystem hasflaggedanywherefrom40,000toover
100,000 returns per year and has prevented the yearly payment of
something between $300 million to over two billion dollars in fraudulent or
improperrefunds.
However, tax laws change; and perpetrators get smarter. Therefore, after
Step1:APerfectly
several years of successful operation, the IRS realized that it had to
GoodOperationalSystem
upgradethesystemifitweretocontinuetobeeffectiveatcatchingfraud.
The Major Upgrade
To implement this upgrade, the IRS asked for competitive quotes for a new Web-based system.
TheIRSdesignatedthenewsystemasalowriskandlowcomplexityproject.
1
Materialforthisarticlecamefromthefollowingsources:
USAToday,HowtheIRSfailedtostop$200Minbogusrefunds;December5,2006.
WashingtonPost,SoftwaredelaysaidtocostIRS$318millioninoverpaidrefunds;Saturday,September2,2006.
AOLNews,IRSdidn’tuseafraudscreeningprogramthisyear;July15,2006.
Zdnet,Withnofraud-catchingprogram,IRSloses$300million;September5,2006.
FCW,HousechidesIRSonfailedfraud-detectionsystem;August8,2006.
Tennessean,IRSknewriskbeforerefunds;December5,2006.
CNNMoney,OutdatedcomputerscostIRS$200million;July14,2006.
FoundationforEconomicEducation,ComputerFailureLeadstoBigIRSRefunds;December5,2006.
GovExec,GAOknocksIRSforgapsincomputersecurity;March29,2006.
GovExec,Failureoftaxfrauddetectionsystemworsethanestimated;September5,2006.
1
Thisdocumentmaynotbedistributedinanywaybyelectronicmeans.
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

The winner was DynCorp of Reston, Virginia. DynCorp’s bid was in the order of $20 million.
Shortlyafter,CSCacquiredDynCorpandbecamethecontractorforthesystem.
Work on the new system began in 2001 with an expected completion date in late 2005, just in
timeforprocessingthe2006taxreturns.
However, as often happens, the project began to show delays. It
was plagued by a high turnover in CSC personnel (over 50%
during the course of the project) and by numerous changes in
the IRS executive ranks. As a result, the system cutover was
delayed until January, 2006, and then to February. Things were
Step2:StartDevelopment getting tight if the 2006 tax returns were to be processed by the
ofNewSystem newsystem.
Butwarningflagswerebeingraised.ByNovemberof2005,itwasreportedthat:
 communication between the IRS and CSC computers was painfully slow, often
occurringataspeedequivalenttoadialupline.
 therewererepeateddelaysinsettingupanOracle-basedcomputernetwork.
 theserverswereunreliableandcontinuallyshutdown.
Despite these warning, IRS and CSC personnel repeatedly voiced confidence that a February,
2006,cutoverwouldbeachieved.
Cutover – Bigger Than the Big Bang
Based on this rosy, optimistic outlook, the IRS decided to shut down
the current system in late 2005 in anticipation of the new system
becoming available shortly in January, 2006 (subsequently delayed
until February). So confident were they in the new system that a
contingency plan to recover from a failed cutover was never even
created.Thuswaslaidthegroundworkfordisaster.
The ax fell when a March, 2006, test showed that the new system
could not even process a day’s worth of data in a day. In effect, it
couldnotkeepupwiththeworkloadandwouldneverwork! Step3:Decommission
GoodSystem
No one likes a big-bang cutover in which all processing is suddenly
switchedtoanewsystem inthehopes thatit willwork.However,if thenewsystem doesn’t work,
atleastprocessingcouldbereturnedtotheoldsystem.
InthecaseoftheIRSElectronicFraudDetectionSystem,therewas
not an old system to return to since it would have taken too long to
load the pertinent 2005 returns. The IRS had to stop checking the
2005 returns for fraudulent refunds. Initially, they temporarily froze
some 500,000 refund requests but eventually released these and
processedallreturns,whetherproperornot.
Step4:TestNew
System-Oops!
Even with such an obvious catastrophic outcome, this disaster did
notbecomepublic untila hearingbeforethe SenateFinanceCommitteein Julyof 2006.TheIRS
did not want to expose this problem until all 2005 returns had been filed to avoid providing a
roadmaptothosewhowouldabusethesystem.
2
Thisdocumentmaynotbedistributedinanywaybyelectronicmeans.
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Through other procedures, the IRS was able to catch about $94 million in improper returns.
However, the Treasury Inspector General estimates that perhaps $318 million dollars in
fraudulent and improper returns were not detected. It is unlikely that most 2005 filers with
improperrefundswilleverbecaught.
In fact, the IRS lacks any comprehensive plan to recover fraudulent refunds. Mark Everson, the
IRSCommissioner,saidthat“we’renotgoingtogoback…that’sgone.”
From the IRS Commissioner
ThereactionofIRSCommissionerMarkEversontothisdisasterwasveryinsightful.Hesaid:
“Certain key decisions should have been elevated or different decisions should have been taken
and brought up the chain at certain points in time. There was not an appreciation of risk or good
appropriatecommunicationshere.Thattomeisthebeginningandtheendofit… Theremightbe
some things that contributed at the margins, of course. You’ve got to have good processes.
People have to know what’s important to take up … and to exercise good judgment, and it didn’t.
happeninthiscase.”
From a Never Again viewpoint, the operative words in his statement are “There was not an
appreciationofrisk…”Thatisanunderstatementatbest.
What Next?
As a result of the March, 2006, test that
showed that the new system could not keep
up with the workload, the IRS directed CSC
to stop work on the new system and to
restart the old system so that it could begin
processing the 2006 tax returns starting in Step5:StopNew
SystemDevelopment
early 2007. The IRS says that improper
2006 tax returns may trigger audits on the WHATNOW?
corresponding2005returns,
The Treasury Inspector General plans a study to determine more precisely the amount of
fraudulent refunds that were lost. It will also do a detailed review of the IRS fraud detection
procedures.
Lessons Learned
The main lesson to be learned from this
disastrous experience seems to be
painfully obvious. It is to never cut over
cutover
to a new system without a contingency
plan. Should the cutover fail, there must
be a way to continue processing on the
failback
oldsystem.
newsystem
The first step in this process is to fully test
oldsystem the new system before the cutover.
Somehow, the IRS thought that the new system would be infallible. As Mr. Everson said, “There
3
Thisdocumentmaynotbedistributedinanywaybyelectronicmeans.
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

wasnotanappreciationof risk.”Toactuallydecommissiontheoldsystem beforethenewsystem
hasprovenitselftobeproperlyworkingispurefolly.
In fact, given the industry’s years of experience with these sorts of cutovers, it should be obvious
thattheodds areagainsta newsystem becomingoperationalaccordingto its intendedschedule.
Systemdevelopmentsalmostalwaysextendbeyondtheirscheduledtimes.
Failing back to the old system is not necessarily an easy process. What happens to all of the
transactions that have been processed on the new system? Can they be recovered and
reentered on the old system? Can the old database be brought up-to-date with the current state
oftheapplication?
In the IRS’s case, a simple solution could have been the reentry of those refund-claiming tax
forms that had been entered into the new system before the failback decision was made.
However,missingthefirstseveralmonthsofactivityrobbedtheIRSofthisopportunity.
Of course, the best contingency plan involves replicating transactions entered into the new
system back to the old system to keep its database synchronized. In this way, the old system is
immediately ready to be returned to service. The ultimate of this strategy is an active/active
architecture in which the new system is brought online and shares the processing load with the
oldsystem.Ineithercase,onlywhenthenewsystemhasprovenitselfistheoldsystemretired.
4
Thisdocumentmaynotbedistributedinanywaybyelectronicmeans.
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
|---|--|--|
| 0 |  |  |
| 1 |  |  |