CPA at Aqueduct, Belmont, and Saratoga Race Tracks
January2007
Continuousprocessingarchitecturesarenothingnew.Theyhavebeenaroundfordecadesand
usedthesametechniquesthatweusetoday.Wetakealookinthisarticleatoneoftheearly
continuousprocessingarchitectures,implementedandputintoproductionoverfourdecadesago.
The New York Racing Association
The New York Racing Association (NYRA) operates some of the best known race tracks in the
world – Aqueduct, Belmont, and Saratoga. Belmont is the home of the Belmont Stakes, one of
thethreeracingeventsthattogetherareknownastheTripleCrown.
Totalizator Systems
All race tracks, including NYRA, operate totalizator systems. A totalizator is the system which
accumulates wagers intopools.Basedonthemonies accumulatedineachpool,it calculates and
displays the current odds that each horse in the race may come in first (win), second (place), or
show(third)anddisplaysthepayoffsforthewinninghorsesattheconclusionoftherace.
Up until the early1960s, totalizators were electromechanical relaysystems.These systems were
inflexible in that adding additional wagering types such as a Daily Double (choosing the first and
second place horses) or a Trifecta (choosing the top three winners) was verydifficult. In addition,
they were not as reliable as would be desired and required continual maintenance by highly
skilledtechnicians.
In the early 1960s, NYRA decided to build a computerized totalizator system to solve these
problems.Thishadneverbeendonebefore,soNYRAwasthepioneer.1
System Functions
This first computerized totalizator system was to perform all of the functions of its electro-
mechanical kin. It needed to service 600 ticket issuing machines (TIMs) generating 1,200
transactions per second (a hefty transaction rate even by today’s standards). Win, Place, Show,
and Daily Double pools were to be supported; and the system had to be expandable to handle
other types of wagering (a Trifecta was later added). In addition, advanced sales on later races
hadtobesupported.
1
ThiswasproveninalengthypatentcasebroughtbyWestburyRaceTrackinQueens,NewYork.Westburyclaimed
alsotohavebeenfirst.
1
Thisdocumentmaynotbedistributedinanywaybyelectronicmeans.
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Atickettransaction was fairlysimple.It included the racenumber,the horse number (or numbers
for the Daily Double), the pool (Win, Place, Show, Daily Double) and the amount wagered.
Against all good design at that time and today, each transaction was processed sequentially in
the interrupt routine. In this way, ticket processing time could be kept to less than 800
microseconds, the maximum processing time allowed to achieve the 1,200 transactions per
secondthroughputrate.
Each wager was added to the pool of money accumulating for each horse in the specified pool.
Every ninety seconds, the odds of a horse coming into the money in each pool were calculated
based on the horse’s popularity in the betting. These odds were posted to the large infield board
and to monitors distributed around the race track. In addition, the current state of each pool was
printedandwrittentomagnetictapeforlaterauditingpurposes.
WWIINN PPLLAACCEE SSHHOOWW
InfieldBo--ard
H200
H200
ticketissuing
H200
machines(TIMs)
video
monitors
reports
judges tape
console
NYRATotalizatorSystem
Also calculated and displayed were the anticipated payoffs based on these odds after deducting
thestate’stakefrom thepoolandroundingdownthepayofftothenearestfivecentsonthedollar
(the remainder was called breakage and also went to the state). If a horse was predicted to pay
less than five cents on the dollar, the payoff was rounded up to that amount – a difference
coughedupbythetrack (greatcarewas takentochoosehorses foraraceinwhichthere was no
obviousfavoritesoastoavoidthissituation).
2
Thisdocumentmaynotbedistributedinanywaybyelectronicmeans.
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Wagering stopped when the horses left the gates. At the conclusion of the race, the judges
posted the winners by entering the finishing order of the horses via a Judges Console. The
system then calculated and displayed the final payoffs. It also printed and wrote to tape a variety
of reports showingthefinal poolamounts,thenumber of tickets soldfor eachhorseineachpool,
thepayoffamounts,andthestate’stakeforitspercentageofpoolsandthebreakage.
Availability Requirements
The availability of the totalizator system was a critical issue. Consider the following scenario - a
bettor is convinced that horse #3 is going to win against all odds and will provide a big payoff. As
thebettorstandsinlineshortlybeforetheracewith$100towager,thetotalizatorsystemfails.No
moreticketscanbesold.
The race is run anyway based on pools which existed before the system failure, and horse #3
does win. The payout is 50:1. Had the totalizator system been in working order, the bettor would
have won $5,000. Instead, he walks away with only the $100 he was unable to wager. Similarly,
hundredsofotherracetrackpatronsarealsocheatedoutofpotentialwinnings.
This situation had happened in the past, with resulting riots and significant damage to race track
facilities. Therefore, totalizator failure had to be avoided at all costs. 100% uptime was
paramount.TheRecoveryTimeObjective(RTO)waszero.
In addition, the system had to be protected from data loss should it fail. The pools still had to be
accountedfor,andmonies still hadto be paid out. TheRecoveryPoint Objective, themeasureof
theamountofdatathatcouldbelostduetoasystemfailure,wasalsozero.
System Architecture
Thesystem chosenfor this task was the Honeywell H200(yes, Honeywell was a major computer
supplierbackthen).Interestingly,theH200wasasix-bitcharacter-orientedmachine,makingitan
unlikely system for such requirements. However, it was blazingly fast and had an advanced
interrupt system for its time. It was deemed to be one of the few systems capable of handling the
transactionworkload.
The prime contractor was Australia-based Automatic Totalizator, Ltd., which won out over the
American Totalizator Company. The information for this case studycame from the files of Dr. Bill
Highleyman who was system architect and project manager for the system. Dr. Highleyman is
nowManagingEditoroftheAvailabilityDigest.
TripleModularRedundancy
The system was designed to be a triplexed system (triple modular redundancy). Three identically
configured H200 systems cooperated in the operation. One acted as the active system, one as a
hotbackup,andoneasacoldstandby.
The active system and the backup system were maintained in synchronism via lock-stepping at
thetransactionlevel.Shouldtheactivesystem fail,anoperator commandswitchedroles;andthe
backup system immediately took over the active role. The only delay in system recovery was the
operator’sdecisiontimetoswitchover.
Should either the active system or the backup system fail, the cold standby was put into service
as thenewhotbackupsystem.Itwas synchronized withthecurrentactivesystem bytransferring
3
Thisdocumentmaynotbedistributedinanywaybyelectronicmeans.
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

the current state of the pools via a memory-to-memory transfer, a process which took only a few
secondsandwasdoneconcurrentlywithcontinuedwagering.
TransactionProcessing
The active and backup systems were kept in synchronism by having each system process each
transaction–primarilytickettransactions andtheJudges Consoleinputs.This was accomplished
byusingalock-steppedTIMscanningcomplex.
ticketissuingmachines(TIMs)
. . . . . . . .
(64)
. . . . . . . .
TIM TIM TIM TIM
(16)
Scanner Scanner Scanner Scanner
Master sync Master Master
Scanner Scanner Scanner
H200 ack H200
H200
nak
active hot
standby
backup
TotalizatorTransactionSynchronization
The scanner complex comprised two levels, Master Scanners and TIM Scanners. Each of the
three H200 systems had its own Master Scanner. The Master Scanners could poll up to 16 TIM
Scanners. The TIM Scanners polled the ticket issuing machines. Each could poll up to 64 TIMs,
givingasystemcapacityof1,024TIMs,morethantherequired600.
