Telecom Italia’s Active/Active Mobile Services
March2007
Telecom Italia
The Telecom Italia Group (http://www.telecomitalia.com) provides
fixed-line and mobile telephone services to the Italian marketplace as
well as mobile services to subscribers in other countries. It is the predominant mobile service
provider in Italy. It uses HP NonStop active/active systems to ensure the continuity of some of its
criticalmobileservices.
The Telecom Italia Group’s strategic guidelines include accelerating the convergence between
fixed and mobile telephony, broadband internet, and media content. High-profile brands such as
Telecom Italia, Olivetti, TIM (Telecom Italia Mobile) and others mark the Telecom Italia Group’s
activitiesintheentireadvancedcommunicationschain.
Telecom Italia Mobile
Telecom Italia is the largest cell phone service operator in Italy and provides
coverage to over 95% of the country via its TIM-branded mobile services. The
TIM brand is no longer just Italian. It is also recognized in Europe, the
Mediterraneanbasin,andinSouthAmerica.
The TIM network is a dual-band mobile network which provides GSM and 3G services. It
supports prepaid roaming, WAP (wireless application protocol) navigation, high-speed data
services,andinternationalvideophone.
With almost 54 million mobile phone lines, 26
million of which are in Italy, TIM has become the
major strength of the international presence of the
Telecom Italia Group. Via TIM, Telecom Italia is a
predominant provider of mobile services to
Brazilian subscribers – it is Brazil’s number two
carrier and is its leading GSM mobile provider.
Telecom Italia formerly provided mobile services
to subscribers in other countries as well prior to
divesting itself of operations in Peru, Venezuela,
andGreece.
TIM'sCoverageArea The Telecom Italia Group is a member of the
FreeMove Alliance, whichforms thelargestmobile
community in the world. The FreeMove Alliance provides seamless service to almost 300 million
1
Thisdocumentmaynotbedistributedinanywaybyelectronicmeans.
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

customersin28countries, suchasItaly,GreatBritain,France,Spain,theNetherlands,Germany,
Belgium, and Switzerland. This explains TIM’s motto, “Vivera senza confini” - “Living without
borders.”
Continuously Available Services
A critical attribute of telephone services is that they must be dependable. To provide extreme
reliabilities in its network, TIM uses HP’s Open Call Intelligent Network Server (INS), a NonStop
system that provides telephone SS7 switching services. Highly reliable operation is provided by
configuring INS as two or more nodes, which are kept synchronized by HP’s mated-pair
technologyinanactive/active-likeconfiguration.
In addition to services provided by INS, TIM supports additional special services that have been
implemented by Telecom Italia. Among these services are Small Message Services (SMS) and
UnifiedMessagingServices(UMS).
SMS is a service for sending small text messages entered by one subscriber to another
subscriber. SMS messages are stored in the system for forwarding to the recipient. If the
receivingsubscriber’scellphoneis notcurrentlycommunicatingwiththenetwork,themessageis
held until the next time the cell phone logs on to the network. At that time, the text message is
senttothereceivingsubscriber.
UMS is a service that supports voice mail, email, and faxes. As with SMS, UMS stores these
messages. Email and fax messages are forwarded to the user if he is currently connected, or
they are held until he becomes connected. UMS notifies subscribers that they have voice mail
waiting. As a subscriber moves in and out of coverage areas or first turns on his phone, a
message is sent to his phone if there are one or more voice messages waiting for him. This
notificationgenerallyresultsinanaudiblebeepandanicondisplayedonthecellphone’sscreen.
SMSandUMSsupportmessagingfromortobothmobilephonesandfixed-linephones.
Redundancy Requirements
When Telecom Italia first implemented its SMS and UMS services on HP’s INS running on an
S74000 NonStop server, it found that the server was handling one thousand transactions per
second; and this volume was growing. Clearly, the company had to prepare for future significant
expansion.
Furthermore, though the HP NonStop servers were fault-tolerant, the company had to be
prepared to recover from a technical, human, or natural disaster that might take down its
processing center. Therefore, it decided to expand its INS system to a two-node active/active
system.Eachsystem normallyprocesses half of thetransactionloadandsends updates via data
replicationtoitscompanionsystem.
With this configuration, the TIM network can now withstand the loss of one of its data centers by
simply rerouting all transactions to the surviving system. Also, capacity can easily be expanded
byaddingnodestotheactive/activeapplicationnetwork.
System Configuration
Telecom Italia installed one INS node in Milan and one in Rome. Milan is in north central Italy,
and Rome is in the center of Italy’s western coast. These locations provided sufficient separation
fordisastertoleranceandofferedanefficientnetworktopologytosupportcelltowernetworking.
2
Thisdocumentmaynotbedistributedinanywaybyelectronicmeans.
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Both nodes are sized so that each can handle the entire network load. In this way, there will be
nodegradationofserviceshouldonenodebecomeunavailable.
TIM’s cell towers are connected to the INS sites by a dedicated cell tower network. Each cell
tower knows its primary INS node and normally routes all of its traffic to that node. Should that
nodefail(or betakendownformaintenanceor upgrade),thecelltower willrerouteallofits traffic
tothesurvivingnode.
Theroutingrulescanbechangedsothatthesystemcanbeloadbalancedwhennecessary.
SMSmessages SMSmessages
trafficdata missedcalls
Shadowbase
NonStop NonStop
server server
datareplication
RomeINSNode MilanINSNode
TIM'sINSServices
Database Synchronization
Each INS node in the TIM network maintains a complete database for the entire system. As
changesaremadetoadataiteminonedatabase,thatchangeisreplicatedtotheotherdatabase
sothatthetwoarekeptinsynchronism.
Datareplicationisasynchronoussothatitdoesnotaffecttheresponsivenessoftheapplication.It
is bidirectional so that changes are replicated in both directions. Data replication for the services
added to INS, such as the SMS and UMS applications, are provided by Gravic’s Shadowbase
asynchronous data replication engine (www.gravic.com), configured to provide bidirectional
replication.
Data Collisions and Relative Replication
As cell tower traffic is received by an INS node, that node updates subscriber records with the
number of calls, the number of minutes used, and other information such as roaming so that the
subscriber can be billed. It also stores SMS and UMS messages for routing to subscribers and
tracksvoicemailmessagesawaitingdelivery.
ThoughalltrafficforagivensubscriberisbeingroutedtoonlyoneINSnodeatatime,depending
uponthesubscriber’slocation,thereisstillthepossibilityfordatacollisions.Thisisbecausethere
may also be administrative activity being carried out for that subscriber on the other node. For
instance, a customer service representative may be adding services for that subscriber or
modifyingtheattributesforserviceswhichthesubscriberalreadyhas.
3
Thisdocumentmaynotbedistributedinanywaybyelectronicmeans.
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Alternatively, a batch job modifying a subscriber’s record may be running on one node while the
othernodeisprocessingthatsubscriber’scellphonetraffic.
If an administrative or batch action modifies a row in the database at one node at the same time
that a cell phone transaction modifies the same row in the other node, a data collision occurs. If
the data replication scheme replicates entire rows, the bidirectional replication of the changed
rows will overwrite the changes first made at each node. Both databases are now different, and
botharewrong.
To solve this problem, Shadowbase uses relative replication rather than absolute row replication.
If the change is numeric (such as adding five minutes to the subscriber’s used time),his call time
is incremented byfive in the local database. Then, rather than sending the modified record to the
other system, only the relative change to the numeric field is sent. In this case, the other system
wouldbedirectedtoaddfivetothatdatafieldforthatsubscriber.
Thus, if numeric changes are made to the same record, or even to the same data item, at the
sametimeattwodifferentnodes,onlytherelativechangesarereplicated.
For instance, let us take the case of a data field that initially holds a count of 30 in both
databases. Node A adds one to that data field at the same time that Node B adds eight to the
field. Node A increments its data field to 31 and replicates a change of +1 to Node B. Node B
adds8tothedatafield,resultinginanewcountof38,andreplicatesachangeof+8toNodeA.
+1 Uponreceiptofthe+1directivefrom Node
+1 NodeA NodeB +8
A, Node B increments its data field value
database database
from 38 to 39. Meanwhile, Node A adds 8
+8
to its data field value of 31, resulting in a
value of 39. Both nodes end up agreeing
originalvalue=30 originalvalue=30
30+1=31 30+8=38 eventhoughadatacollisionoccurred.
31+8=39 38+1=39
If a textual data collision occurs, the
RelativeReplication
processing is not quite that simple. One or
the other of the changes must be accepted and the other rejected. TIM has implemented a
business rule that accepts the latest change. Thus, if Node A changes the text field in a row, and
one millisecond later, Node B changes that same text field, Node A will overwrite its change with
thatofNodeB.Thiscollisionwillbeloggedforlatermanualreview.
Postscript
Telecom Italia is planning to upgrade its INS systems to the latest versions of the NonStop
operating system with no interruption to subscriber services. This will be done by switching all
traffictoonenodewhileupgradingtheothernode.
Zero downtime migrations such as this are a hallmark of active/active systems since the traffic
normallyhandledbyanodecanbeswitchedtoothernodes intheapplicationnetwork.Thatnode
canthenbetakendownformaintenanceorupgrades.
TIM’s active/activeconfigurationalso positions Telecom Italiatobe abletoaddcapacityeasilyby
simplyaddingadditionalnodestotheTIMnetworkandbythenredistributingitscelltowertraffic.
4
Thisdocumentmaynotbedistributedinanywaybyelectronicmeans.
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
