BANKSERV Goes Active/Active
April2007
As a trusted partner, BANKSERV (www.bankserv.co.za) is
an integral part of the infrastructure of the South African
banking industry. Ithas beenappointed byPASA(Payments
Association of South Africa) under the National Payments
Systems Act 78/1998 as a payment clearing house operation and consequently
provides interbank electronic transaction switching services to the banking sector.
BANKSERV prides itself on providing its clients with the highest qualityof transaction,
switching and value-added services in support of client business objectives while
effectingsignificantcostsavingsandreducingriskandcomplexityintheindustry.
BANKSERV is an exceptionally successful company. It performs well financially and
employs a number of loyal, talented and experienced individuals. Intellectual capital
and integrity form the bedrock of BANKSERV. It is committed to achieving the best
possibleresultsforallitsstakeholders.
BANKSERV Background and History
Prior to the establishment of BANKSERV in the first half of 1993, the banking industry
in South Africa jointly owned several companies that provided shared services to the
banks in a number of different payment channels. The companies in this sector each
followed their own directions and operated in their separate silos. There was clearly a
need to consolidate them into a single structure. An interbank task group was
appointed to investigate the feasibility of this proposal; and in March, 1993, the
bankingindustryreachedagreementandfoundedBANKSERV.
Payment Routing
When a consumer withdraws cash from an ATM or purchases an item via a point-of-
sale (POS) device or via a debit card, a payment transaction is created. That
transactionissenttothebankmanagingthatdevice.Ifthetransactionistobemadeon
another bank, that transaction must be routed to the remote issuing bank, which then
returns a confirmation or rejection message to the device to complete the transaction –
either the dispensingof cashfrom anATM,thepurchaseof theitem,or therejectionof
thetransaction.
The routing of these transactions is the service provided by BANKSERV. The
originating bank will send the payment transaction to BANKSERV, which will forward it
totheissuingbank.Thatbankwillprocessthetransactionandwillreturnaconfirmation
messageorarejectionmessagethruBANKSERVtotheoriginatingbank.
1
Thisdocumentmaynotbedistributedinanywaybyelectronicmeans.
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

BankServ
payment
request
authorization
Consumer
Originating TheBankServNetwork Issuing
Bank Bank
Should BANKSERV's routing service become unavailable, the devices which it
supports are out of service for interbank transactions. Therefore, 100% uptime of this
critical service is a must for BANKSERV because if it can’t forward a transaction, the
customer standing at the cash register or ATM can’t finish his purchase or get his
money. The bank is always blamed, and this gets BANKSERV's customer banks very
upset.
BANKSERV’s Active/Active Strategy
AccordingtoAntonLessing,TechnicalManagerofBANKSERV,9sareofnointerestto
him - only 100% uptime. BANKSERV will soon achieve this extreme availability by
using active/active technology to implement a Continuous Processing Architecture. In
an active/active environment, multiple nodes sharing a common distributed redundant
database are all actively processing transactions for a common application. Should a
node go down for any reason (such as a hardware failure, software failure, operator
error,plannedoutage,ordisaster),allthatneedstobedoneistoswitchusersovertoa
survivingnode-anactionthatcantakeonlyseconds.
Mr. Lessing feels that availability and active/active, in particular,
is a rapidly growing need. There are many companies (banks in
his case) that want to move to active/active but are waiting for
otherstodoitfirst.
BANKSERV’s current system is in Johannesburg and runs three
major ACI Base24 applications – ATM, POS, and debit card. All
customer banks connect to this site in Johannesburg. ACI has
said it believes that BANKSERV could be the first Base24
payment transaction switch that does not have devices
connecteddirectlytoittoachieveitsmission.
BANKSERV’s new active/active strategy is to bring up a second node in Midrand,
about 35 km awayfrom the current system in Johannesburg. The Midrand node will be
identically configured and will also run the ATM, POS, and debit card applications
underBase24.Bothnodeswillrunonsix-processorNonStopS7800systems.
2
Thisdocumentmaynotbedistributedinanywaybyelectronicmeans.
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

NonStop
The nodes are connected by
S7800
three 2-mb communication
links. Traffic is prioritized so
Midrand
that Base24 traffic is given
priority. Any particular bank will
be assigned one of the two
nodes as its primary node and customer 3x2mb
banks
the other as its secondary backbone
node. Each bank will submit all
transactions to its primary
Johannesburg
node. Transactions will be
replicated to the secondary
node to keep the two nodes in BankServ'sActive/Active
NonStop
synchronism. If the transaction Topology S7800
is toberoutedtoabank onthe
sendingbank’ssecondarynode,theroutingwillbedonefromthesecondarynode.
If a bank’s primary node goes down, the bank will route all further transactions to its
secondary node for processing. In this case, there may be some inflight transactions
which are lost in the replication pipeline. To assist with these problems an application
called the Settlement and Query System has been implemented, which is used to
resolve queries on transactions. BANKSERV’s data shows that it will lose an average
offivetotenin-transittransactionsfollowinganodefailure.
Production Cutover
BANKSERV’s new dual-node system went live in late September, 2006. However, due
to the holiday season, most banks chose not make any changes to their processing
configurations until early 2007. Therefore, to take advantage of the increase in system
capacity afforded by the two nodes, the debit card service will initially be moved to the
Midrand node; and the ATM and POS services will remain on the Johannesburg node.
If a transaction is destined for an issuing bank on the other node, it is sent to that node
overthehigh-speedbackbonenetworkforrouting.
However, even though the nodes were not initiallyrunning as an active/active network,
the transaction data was replicated to the other node so that no transactions would be
lostintheeventofanodefailure(exceptforthosefewwhichmaybeinflight)
Starting in January, 2007, BANKSERV began running applications in active/active
mode for those banks who desire to use this service. All applications will be active on
both nodes. Some banks will connect to one node and some to the other node. Still
otherswillconnecttobothnodesandwillsplittheirloadbetweenthetwonodes.
In order for a bank to run in an active/active configuration, it mustfirstmeet two criteria
forBANKSERVtomeettheservicelevelagreement:
 Thebankmusthaveinstalledcommunicationlinkstobothnodes.
 The bank must change its applications so that they can interoperate with
bothnodes.
Should one node fail, the customer bank’s system must be able to detect this failure
and switch all transactions to the surviving node. Base24 already has this capability. It
3
Thisdocumentmaynotbedistributedinanywaybyelectronicmeans.
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

supportsbothaprimaryandasecondaryDTE(dataterminalequipment),whicharethe
connections to the dual communication channels. If Base24 cannot send a transaction
overtheprimaryDTE,itautomaticallyswitchestothesecondaryDTE.
Base24 is used by many of the larger banks. However, many smaller regional banks
use Postilion from Mosaic, an S1 company. Unfortunately, Postilion can’t automatically
reroute messages. It must be manually reconfigured, a process that may take several
minutes toaccomplish.Onepossibilityfor these banks is to use intelligent routers such
as F5 Networks’ BIG-IP Global Traffic Manager, which can detect when the receiving
end is down and can automatically reroute traffic to the other node. However, many
intelligent routers detect a downed condition by lack of carrier. If the link is good, but
data is not being sent or received as would be the case with a downed node, they are
notawareofthedownedcondition.
Active/active configurations require that there be reliable connections to both nodes.
Preferably, each of these connections would themselves be redundant and would be
routed through different carriers to ensure that a carrier fault would not take down both
connections. How likely is it that both connections could fail? Not very. However,
BANKSERV recently lost fourteen lines when construction equipment dug up a major
cable while building a new Johannesburg-Pretoria railroad for the 2010 Soccer World
Cup.
Lost Transactions
As was mentioned earlier, BANKSERV has implemented a Settlement and Query
System (SQS) to reconstruct lost transactions. Since data is being replicated via
asynchronous replication, there is a small chance that a bank may lose a transaction
due to a node failure. This generally will be noticed first by the consumer, who either
does not get his cash or later finds that his account has been charged for a transaction
that did not, in fact, complete. The consumer will report this to his bank, which can use
SQS to make a queryabout the transaction. Using a unique serial number assigned to
each transaction by BANKSERV, SQS can follow the movement of the transaction
throughitssystem andcanadjustthesettlementaccountsforthebanksparticipatingin
thattransaction.
BANKSERV keeps records online for 90 days so that such issues can be resolved
quickly during this time period. However, transactions cannot be resolved in real time
since ACI opens its files with exclusive access, which prevents them from being
updated by the replication engine. Resolution is generally accomplished the following
day.
Afterthe90dayperiod,thedataisstillavailableinthearchives;butitwilltakelongerto
resolvealosttransactionsincethearchiveddatamustbeaccessed.
Lost transactions are a problem that goes beyond replication issues. For instance, if a
communication line to an ATM is lost during a transaction, the ATM will time out and
will display some sort of message such as “host down.” The ATMs will back out this
transaction.
Replication
ACI uses the GoldenGate replication engine to replicate data between the nodes. One
problem, notes Mr. Lessing, is that ACI opens its Enscribe transaction log files with
exclusive access. GoldenGate cannot currently replicate data to an open file with
4
Thisdocumentmaynotbedistributedinanywaybyelectronicmeans.
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

exclusive access. Therefore, the log files on the two nodes are not identical copies of
eachother.Rather, each node willcontainits own log fileandaseparatelogfilethatis
a replicate of the log file on the other node. At the end of the day, the two files must be
mergedinordertogetacommonunifiedlogfile.
GoldenGate has said that it has come up with a correction for this problem. However,
at this critical time, Mr. Lessing does not want to be the pioneer and will live with this
problem until a better time. The file merge is a minor irritation as his entire batch run
onlytakesanhourorless.
Performance
File merging may not have been a minor irritation with the previous system.
BANKSERV was running two K-series, 16-processor systems which were getting
heavily loaded. At that time, BANKSERV upgraded to its current two S7806
processors. Prior to doing the upgrade, BANKSERV stress-tested the new systems by
using the K-series systems to generate test transactions. It found that both K-series
systems running fully loaded could generate only enough transactions to load the S-
series machines to less than 50%, showing the significant increase in power provided
bytheS-seriessystems.
Mr. Lessing states that the K-series systems could not possibly have handled the
current work load.However,thestress testshowedthatasingleS-series system could
handle 178 transactions per second at about a 44% load. His current peak transaction
rate is 75 transactions per second, with a monthly rate of 38 million transactions.
Consequently,hefeelsthathehasalotofroomforgrowth.
The Future
Mr.Lessingbelieves thatservice downtimeformaintenancecanno longer betolerated
bycustomers. More andmore vendors and customers are striving to achieve at least 5
nines uptime. Therefore, BANKSERV should use the technology available to achieve
zerodowntimeforitscustomers.
BANKSERV no longer talks about disaster recovery plans. The word is now
ContinuousProcessing.
Mr.LessingisalsoadirectorofITUG.Hecanbereachedatanton@bankserv.co.za.
5
Thisdocumentmaynotbedistributedinanywaybyelectronicmeans.
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
