Bank-Verlag – the Active/Active Pioneer
December2006
WolfgangBreidbachandhiscolleaguesmaywellbethefathersofactive/activesystems.Atleast,
wedon’tknowofanyearlieractive/activesystem.Equallyinterestingisthatthedrivingmotivation
for this early active/active system was not only high availability. It was also zero downtime
migration.
Hereisthestory.
Bank-Verlag and the Debit Card
Bank-Verlag is a subsidiary of an association of over 300 German banks, including Deutsche
Bank and all other large banks in Germany. It was established in 1961 to be the publishing arm
for the association and published a banking magazine which was distributed to the association’s
memberbanks.
In1985,theassociation directedBank-Verlagtostart anelectronic bankingservicefor its smaller
memberbanks.WolfgangwashiredasBank-Verlag’sfirstITemployee.
His first task was to provide online banking services and debit card production for these banks.
He was giventheuse of an IBM System 370ina data center of one of theassociation’s banks to
implementtheseservices.
The debit card service involved creating cards based on a bank account. Money within a daily
limitcouldbedrawnonceadayfromanATM.TheATMtransactionwasbookedagainstthebank
accountafterwards. Everythingneededwasencodedineachdebitcard’smagneticstripe.
As a customer used a card, the date of the last transaction was recorded in the card’s magnetic
stripe. There was no online tracking of the transactions by a central system. After all, why would
thisbenecessary?Thecardtoldall.
The TV Exposé
Until one fateful day in 1986. Bank-Verlag’s management was stunned to learn from a TV
investigative report that people were using debit cards fraudulently. The scheme was quite
straightforward.
The fraud was initiated by stealing a debit card and by somehow managing to get its PIN. The
PIN was obtained perhaps by looking over the owner’s shoulder or because the owner had kept
thePINtogetherwithhiscard.Atthattime,peoplewerenotfamiliarwithalltheserisks.
The thieves simply purchased readily available equipment to read and write card magnetic
stripes. They read and wrote down the data in the stripes of the stolen debit cards, including the
1
©2006SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

dates of the last transactions. Theythen withdrew moneyfrom ATMs within the daily limits of the
cards and later rewrote the magnetic stripe of each debit card with the old data, especially the
date of the last transaction. In this way, they easily could exceed the cards’ daily limits. They
could use the cards over and over again, and the banks were never the wiser. It took a TV
reportertouncoverthefraud.
As a result, Bank-Verlag was ordered by the banking association to build a central authorization
system for the banks’ debit cards. Wolfgang and his colleges immediately set to work to do just
that, again using a data center IBM 370 for the authorization task. The authorization system was
front-ended by an IBM Series 1 system as a communication subsystem. They were able to
implement this application in a very short time, and the system went into service later that same
year.
Using this new system, ATMs reported in real time the contents of the magnetic stripe to the
authorization system, which validated the data and returned the data to be recorded by the ATM
onthestripe.Nolongercouldonefraudulentlymodifythedataonthestripe.
Of course, if the system were down, no one could withdraw cash using a debit card. However, at
thattimeATMswerenotsopopular.Thus,thiswasnotdeemedtobeabigproblem.
Enter Tandem
Shortly after the new authorization system came online, Deutsche Bank acquired the bank which
owned the data center being used by Bank-Verlag. Deutsche Bank closed down that bank’s data
center, and Bank-Verlag’s processing operations were moved to a Deutsche Bank data center.
This did not sit well for competitive reasons with the other banks in the association, and they
authorizedBank-Verlagtoopenitsowndatacenter.
Bank-Verlag now had the opportunity to revisit its choice of data processing systems. It
investigated several high availability systems, including those of Nixdorf and Siemans. However,
Bank-Verlag had close relations with BankServ, a financial transaction routing service located in
Brussels,whichwasusingalittle-knownsystemfromTandemComputers.
What impressed Bank-Verlag was that while the providers of the other systems focused on the
number of 9s before the decimal point to describe their availability. Tandem focused on the
number of 9s after the decimal point. Other system vendors bragged that theycould achieve two
9s before the decimal point (99%). Tandem claimed that they could achieve two 9s after the
decimalpoint(99.99%).
Debit cards were becoming more and more popular, and the inconvenience of not being able to
use them because the authorization system was down was rapidly becoming a serious issue.
This was strongmotivation for Bank-VerlagtoselectahighlyreliableTandem system for thenew
authorizationsystem.
Furthermore, Banksys in Belgium had an application package that ran on Tandem and that did a
lot of what Bank-Verlag needed. That clinched the deal. Of course, Bank-Verlag’s staff had to
write additional applications, which they did in TAL and COBOL. Theyput their firstTandem VLX
intoservicein1988.
The Active/Active Inspiration
Now came the tough part. All of the debit card authorization was still being done on the IBM
system, but Bank-Verlag had to move that processing to the Tandem system without denying
2
©2006SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

service to the debit card holders. It did not want to do this as a “big bang” migration but rather as
acontrolled,incrementalmigration.Thuswasbornactive/active.
Toaccomplishthis,Wolfgang’sgroupmodifiedboththeIBMandtheTandem applicationssothat
each would send debit transactions which it had processed to the other system. Transactions
wereinterchangedas LU 6.2messages,aprotocolsupportedbybothsystems.Thestrategywas
toprocesseachtransactiononeachsystemsothatthesystemswouldremainsynchronized.
They then copied the debit card database from the IBM system to the Tandem system and
moved a few ATMs to the Tandem system. Data collisions were not a problem, as a debit card
could not be at two ATMs at the same time
(at least, legally). Now, any debit card
transaction executed on one system was
IBM 370 transactions
alsoexecutedontheothersystem.
LU6.2
Tandem
As Bank-Verlag became comfortable with
VLX
the new system, it moved more ATMs to the
Tandem system until all had been moved.
Series1 Thisentiremigrationprocesstookonlyafew
days. The IBM System was kept available
asahotbackup.
Extending to Disaster Tolerance
ATMs ATMs
In 1989, the growth in the use of debit cards
IsThistheWorld'sFirst
was exploding; andtheauthorization system
Active/ActiveSystem?
needed to be expanded. In addition, Bank-
Verlag wanted to configure its system to be
geographically distributed in order to achieve a degree of disaster tolerance. Therefore, it
purchased an additional VLX and installed it about three kilometers from the original data center
(Germany is not plagued by hurricanes or earthquakes, so that three kilometers was deemed to
beasafeseparationdistance).Aftertheinstallationof thissystem,theydecommissionedtheIBM
system.
Wolfgang and his group dusted off their active/active facility and brought it up to support the new
node. A problem that Bank-Verlag faced was that the LU 6.2 communications software licensed
from Tandem was veryexpensive. Bank-Verlag thereforerewrotethetransaction replication logic
to use instead SNA LU 0 over X.21 leased lines. This communication technique was faster,
imposed less CPU overhead, and required no specially-licensed communication software from
Tandem.
Since in Bank-Verlag’s case, database synchronization is done by replicating transactions at the
application level, one can question what happens if one system processes a transaction
differently from the other system. Wolfgang points out that this is analogous to data collisions
when using asynchronous data replication, and such inconsistencies are detected by periodically
comparing the databases to verify that they are, in fact, identical. However, he is quick to point
outthatinseventeenyearsofoperation,hehasneverseensuchadiscrepancy.
The Growth of the System
As the years went by, the Tandem (then Compaq, then HP NonStop) systems grew to Cyclones,
thentoK-seriessystems,thentoS-seriessystems,andtodaytoNonStopIntegritysystems.
3
©2006SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

The conversion to S-series was particularly painful for two reasons. First, the S-series did not
support the X.21 communication controllers. The applications had to be rewritten to use the
SWAN controllers and TCP/IP, and all of the communication cables had to be changed and
rerouted. Secondly, the debit card transaction volume had outgrown the capacity of the K-series
disks;andthetransitiontoS-seriesdiskshadtobemade.
Because of schedulingpressures,Wolfganghad toputintoproduction injust afew weeks abeta
version of the new application. It had not been thoroughly tested but ended up working well. He
hadscheduled a downtime window of 24 hours toreplacea node(hedid onenodeata time) but
wasabletocutoverin12to15hours.
Recently, Bank-Verlag upgraded from two six-processor S-series (S86006 and S72006) to a pair
offour-processorIntegrityNS16000s.Thistime,nochangeincommunicationsubsystemsordisk
systems was required (though they migrated S-disks to Integrity disks to save maintenance
charges);andtheconversionwentsmoothlywithnosignificantproblems.
Postscript
Bank-Verlag has since been reorganized. It is now transactions
a holding company managing two operating NS16000 TCP/IP NS16000
3km
companies:
 BV Media continues to be the publishing
armoftheassociationbanks.
 BV Payment Systems provides banking
services, debit card authorization, and
secure PIN letters for the association ATMs ATMs
banks (a secure PIN letter is a tamper- Bank-VerlagToday
proof letter used to notify customers of
PINsfortheirdebitcards).
BV Payment Systems runs NonStop servers as well as several UNIX-based IBM systems.
Wolfgang is now the Director of NonStop Systems for BV Payment Systems. His new
applicationshaveleftTALandCOBOLfarbehindandarewritteninC,C++andJava.
LookingatthehistoryofBank-Verlag,onehastobeimpressedwiththespeedandefficiencythat
characterized many of its migrations. Wolfgang attributes this in great part to the fact that Bank-
Verlag remains a fairly small company of about 170 employees. This gives it an agility difficult to
findinlargercompanies.
Are Wolfgang and his colleagues really the fathers of active/active systems? They certainly are
pioneers in these architectures. There is a quaint American saying that “You can always tell a
pioneer – he is the one with the arrows in his back.” Wolfgang and his colleagues have escaped
the arrows, but they are still the earliest active/active pioneers of whom we know. If anyone
readingthisknowsofanearlier pioneer,pleaseinformusattheAvailabilityDigestsothatwecan
chroniclethatexperience.
4
©2006SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
