At a ticket issuing machine, the selling clerk entered the ticket details (race number, horse, pool,
andamount)andpushedthesellkey.ThiscausedtheTIMtogeneratearequestsignaltoitsTIM
Scanner.
Each TIM Scanner scanned its TIMs for request signals. When it found one, it stopped and
locked onto that TIM, downloading the TIM’s transaction data into its own buffers. It then
generatedarequesttotheMasterScanners.
4
Thisdocumentmaynotbedistributedinanywaybyelectronicmeans.
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

TheMaster Scanner for the activesystem scannedall TIMScanners for anactive request.When
itfoundone,itlockedonto thatTIMscanner,loadedthetransactiondataintoits ownbuffers,and
generated an interrupt request to the active system. At the interrupt level, the active system read
the transaction data from the Master Scanner, processed it, and generated either an
Acknowledgeindication(ack)oraRejectindication(nak).
The Acknowledge/Reject indication was returned through the scanner complex to the TIM, which
either printed the ticket or illuminated a rejection indicator for the selling clerk. At that point, the
involvedTIMScannerandtheMasterScannerwerereleasedtosearchforotherrequests.
The only other interrupt activity of any note was that required to process print and tape buffers
everyninetyseconds.Thishadlittleimpactonticketsellingcapacity.
DatabaseSynchronization
It was, of course, important that the active and backup systems had the same pool data in their
databases. This was accomplished by having the systems independently process each
transaction and then compare their results. The results to be compared were simply the
acknowledgeorrejectdecisions.
To ensure that the two systems were in lock step so far as which transaction was being
processed, the active Master Scanner controlled the transaction processing sequence. When it
found a request from a TIM Scanner, it notified the backup Master Scanner as to which TIM
Scanner to service next. The backup Master Scanner then obtained the same transaction
informationfromtheselectedTIMScannerandprocessedit.
To synchronize the results, the active and backup systems compared the resulting
Acknowledge/Reject indications. If they agreed, the active Master Scanner released that
indication to the TIM Scanner. If they disagreed (i.e., one system wanted to acknowledge the
transaction, and the other wanted to reject the transaction), they both rejected the transaction;
andarejectindicationwassenttotheTIMviaitsTIMscanner.
Thus, in effect, the totalizator system was a triply redundant system, which maintained
synchronizationbetweenitsactiveandbackupsystemsbylock-steppingatthetransactionlevel.
FaultDetection
Thefailureofacriticalcomponentwasdetectedwithinafractionofasecond.Thiswasdonevia
twomeans.
First, the TIM Scanners and active Master Scanner sounded an alarm and illuminated a fault
indicator if they did not have a request serviced within a few milliseconds. Since transaction
processing was in the order of a millisecond, and since there were 16 TIM Scanners serviced
sequentially, a TIM Scanner request should have been serviced within 16 milliseconds. A Master
Scanner request should have been processed immediately since it was serviced at the interrupt
level by the active system. To provide a level of tolerance, these fault timers were set to a value
intheorderof100milliseconds.
The second fault detection means was implemented in the active and backup systems. If one
system wanted to acknowledge a transaction, but the other system wanted to reject that
transaction, the transaction was rejected. However, the system desiring to acknowledge the
transactionincrementedafaultcounterfortheothersystem.Ifafaultcounterreachedaspecified
value, the system rejecting the transactions was reported to be down. Similarly, if one of the
5
Thisdocumentmaynotbedistributedinanywaybyelectronicmeans.
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

systems did not respond with a transaction ack/nak, it was reported to be down by the other
system.
Failure recovery was straightforward and required little thought. If a scanner alarm sounded, or if
the backup system reported that the active system had failed, the operator pressed the button
that activated the backup. It was assumed that the active system with its Master Scanner had
becomeincapableofservicingthescanningcomplex.
If a TIM Scanner alarm continued to sound, then the fault was in that TIM Scanner; and it was
taken out of service. In any event, if it was determined that the active system had failed, the cold
standbysystemwasbroughtintoserviceasthenewbackupsystem.
Failover Testing
A key issue in achieving high availability was the switchover and recovery time. In this case, the
switchover time was very fast because a hot backup system was used. The main component of
switchover timewas thetimerequired for theoperators torecognizethatthere was aproblem.At
thatpoint,ittookonlythepressingofabuttontoeffectswitchover,whichwastotallyautomated.
Recovery of the system to a duplexed state from a failure was much more complicated.
Applications had to be loaded into the standby system (which typically was being used for other
administrative functions). The standby system then had to be activated as the new hot backup
system, and the current pool database had to be transferred to it via a memory-to-memory
transfer. This database transfer occurred during active wagering. If a transaction arrived for an
element in the pool database that had not yet been transferred, the transaction was processed
anywaybythebackupsystem.Thevaluefortheaffecteddataitem wascorrected whenthatdata
elementwascopiedfromtheactivesystem.
NYRA and the operations staff were veryserious about keeping switchover and recoverysmooth
and rapid. To do this, there were weekly exercises prior to the opening of the race track to the
public. A team of TIM clerks simulated betting, and the chief operator devised various failure
scenarios to train the operations staff. One result of this level of training was that every operator
was trained to quickly recognize any system fault and to take corrective action. Upper
managementnever hadto beconsultedtoexecuteaswitchover or recoveryaction. Therecovery
strategywas“Ifindoubt,straightenitout.”
Cutover
Live cutover was very critical as the race track dealt with real money from real customers. The
system was first put into operation at NYRA’s Aqueduct race track. As a hedge, NYRA offered
several days of racing at no cost to the public.Wagering was on paper only – no money actually
changedhands.Theoldelectomechanicaltotalizator was keptpoised totakeover intheeventof
afailureofthenewsystem,which,infact,hadtobedoneonatleastoneoccasion.
Only when the new system had proven itself reliable after several days of service was the old
totalizatordecommissioned.
6
Thisdocumentmaynotbedistributedinanywaybyelectronicmeans.
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Security Enforced by a Distraught Wife
Securitywasanotherseriousissue.Everyattemptwasmadetoensurethattherewasnocashing
of fraudulent tickets. The tickets were printed on a paper that could not be modified. Each had a
codeonitidentifyingtherace,andthecodewasnotdivulgedbeforehand.
The security protections worked very well until a later version of the system using Digital PDP-8s
was introduced. These systems had a front panel with switches that could be used to pause the
computer, modify data, and restart the computer. This should not have caused a problem since
therewereseveralpeopleinthecomputerroom,andanysuchactivitywouldhavebeennoticed.
Unless everyone was in on the fraud. And that is exactly what happened at a small race track.
The computer room was staffed by a small group of two operators and a TIM technician. The
gambit was to wait for the race to be completed and for the judges to declare the winners. One
operator then stopped the backup system, added one or two tickets for a high-paying winning
combination such as the Trifecta, and then forced a switchover. The modified system calculated
theticketpayoffs,whichnowincludedthefraudulenttickets.Ineffect,somemoneywastakenout
ofthepocketsoftherealwinners,butthisamountwasaverysmallfractionofthetotalpool.
Meanwhile,theTIMtechnician,havinginstalledtheracecodeinatestTIMinthecomputerroom,
printed offline the number of fraudulent tickets that had been entered into the computer. These
tickets were then given to runners who cashed the tickets for a fee, not knowing that they were
fraudulent.
All of this fraudulent activity was reflected in the final printed reports so that the auditors never
caught on. The scheme was successful until the wife of one of the operators caught him with the
wife of one of the other perpetrators. The distraught wife blew the whistle, and three young men
spentsometimeinprison.
Postscript
This early, continuously available system remained in operation for almost two decades. It
morphedintoseverallater versions of verysuccessfultotalizator systems installedathundreds of
tracks around the world. Following the H200 system was one based on Digital PDP-8s, then
Tandemsystems,followedbyDigitalPDP-11s.
The original electromechanical TIMs were replaced with intelligent microprocessor-based TIMs.
Wagers were made via mark-sense cards, which were filled out by the bettors and which
supported a wide range of new, exotic wagering products.The TIMs produced machine-readable
tickets, each of which contained a unique, bar-coded serial number that was recorded in the
database.Eachticketcouldcontainamultiplicityofwagers.
Ticket cashing was done automatically by reading the ticket and then looking up the payoff
amounts. The ticket serial number was checked to ensure that it was a valid ticket. Security
provisionswereinstitutedinthecomputerroomtopreventanyfuturefraudulentcollaboration.
Inlater years,both the Tandem systems andthe PDP-11(now VAX) systemsmorphed into state
lotterysystems.
7
Thisdocumentmaynotbedistributedinanywaybyelectronicmeans.
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

