 Itcanignorethefault.
 Itcanattempttorestartthefailedcomponent.
 Itcaninitiateafailover.
 Itcansendanotificationtoappropriatesystemtechnicians.
3
AgratuitousARP(addressresolutioncontrol)isarequestsentbyaserverforitsownMACaddress.Alllisteningrouters
willmaptheIPaddressoftheservertoitsMACaddressontheLAN.Ineffect,theserverhasseizedthisIPaddress.
4
Thisdocumentmaynotbedistributedinanywaybyelectronicmeans.
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Notification implies manual action. Though this may be required in some cases, the requirement
for manual action can lead to long recovery times as the appropriate personnel are located and
notified, following which they must get to the data center (or find a terminal and log onto the
cluster),analyzetheproblem,anddeterminetheactiontobetaken.
Failover Configurations
Two-node cluster configurations are the most common cluster architecture. They maybe used in
asymmetricorsymmetricarrangements.
An asymmetric arrangement is one in which one node is active and the other is standing by,
monitoring the active node and ready to take over should the active node fail. One question
addressed by Marcus and Stern is whether the standbycan be used for anyuseful purpose prior
tohavingtotakeontheactiverole.Theauthorsmentionseveralpossibilities:
 Bad–useitforcodedevelopment,butbugsinnewcodemighttakedownthebackup.
 Acceptable–useitfordatabasedevelopment,whichisnotsorisky.
 Good–useitforsomecritical,matureapplicationwhichcanbeterminatedifnecessary.
 Best–donothingwithit,andletitsimplystandby.
In a symmetric arrangement, both servers are hosting different applications and are backing up
theircompanion.Shouldoneserverfail,allprocessingismovedtothesurvivingserver.
In larger systems, a server may be hosting multiple service groups. In these cases, failover is by
service group rather than by server. It is quite possible that a fault has affected only one service
group,andthatgroupcanberestoredtoservicebyfailingitovertotheotherserver.
There are many other failover configurations. Examples are N to 1, where one standby server
backs up several primary servers; N to M, in which multiple standby servers back up multiple
primaryservers; and ring configurations, in which each server is backed up by the next server in
thering.
Failover Faults
Afaultyfailovercanresultinquiteundesirablesystem operation.Onesuchsituationoccurs when
eachserverdeterminesthattheotherisdown.Thiscancausetwopotentiallysevereproblems:
 Split-Brain Mode, in which both servers think that they are the active server and both try
to write to the public database, thus overwriting each other’s work and corrupting the
database.
 Ping-Ponging, or tug-of-war, in which one server seizes control only to have the other
serverseizebackcontrol.
Proper system monitoring and a good failover utility are musts for proper failover. But the best
protection against failover faults is constant testing. Nobody likes to do it, but there is no other
way.
5
Thisdocumentmaynotbedistributedinanywaybyelectronicmeans.
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Redundant Network Services
Network faults are very difficult to locate. They can be transient and can come and go. The
delayed delivery of messages on a congested network mayappear to be a network fault. Denial-
of-service attacks are a fact of life today. Faults may be caused by hardware or by IP problems
(configuration or routing errors). Networks can be so complex that once a problem is detected, it
maybeverydifficulttolocate.
The consequence is that it is very important to build redundancy into the network so that
communicationcanstillproceedevenintheeventofthefailureofaportionofthenetwork.
Data Service Reliability
Data must be always available to the applications that need it, or the applications will be down.
The commonly used Network File System (NFS) can provide many of the needed availability
functions. Database servers and Web servers are also configurable in high-availability
architectures.
One common question is whether “deep” or “wide” is better. For high availability, is it better to
have a stack of low-end disks; or is it better to use a high-end database server. This is a
cost/availabilitytradeoffthathastobecarefullyinvestigatedforeachinstallation.
Replication Techniques
Data replication technologies are important when switchover times measured in minutes are not
enough. A separate independent backup system with a mounted database copy that is kept
synchronized with the active system can provide rapid and deterministic failover times. However,
this is primarilythe realm of mainframe systems. Theauthors warn thatWindows and Unix users
shouldtreadlightlyhere.
There are many other uses for multiple independent hosts, each with a database copy kept
synchronizedbydatareplication:
 Loadbalancingamongmanyreplicatedservers(primarilyusedforWebservers).
 ResolvingWANlatenciesbyprovidingadatabasecopylocallytoagroupofusers.
 Failover and recovery in the event that one of the database copies becomes
corrupted.
 Disasterrecoveryfollowingatotalserverfailure.
Manyreplicationtechniquesexisttoday:
:
 Filereplication(forexample,viaftportar).
 Block-levelreplicationbydevicedriversordiskcontrollers.
 Transaction-levelreplication.
 Processstatereplication.
Each of these techniques has its own uses. File replication can only be done while the file is
quiescent.Block-levelreplicationdoes notguaranteetheintegrityof thedatabase,whichmustbe
recovered before use. Transaction-level replication depends upon a change log, but maintains a
database that is always consistent and which can be used while replication proceeds. Process
6
Thisdocumentmaynotbedistributedinanywaybyelectronicmeans.
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

statereplication is usedforhighspeedapplications in whichthebackupprocessneeds toremain
synchronizedwithitsactiveprocess.
Application Recovery
Applications canfailfor severalreasons,such as memoryexhaustion or software bugs.Whenan
application module fails, there are several techniques that can be considered to return it to
service:
 Restarttheapplicationandtryagain.
 Doacontrolledshutdownoftheapplication.
 Crash the application (the application bug may have done this anyway) and
restart.
 Restartfromthelastcheckpointifavailable.
Backup and Restore
Database redundancy, even with full mirrors, does not replace proper backup procedures. The
most common use of backup tapes isn’t for disaster recovery. It is for the restoration of corrupted
ordeletedfiles.
Likeallotherprocedures,backupproceduresmustbefrequentlytested.Magnetictapeunitsmust
be properly maintained, and tapes should not be used beyond their useful life. Two backup
copiesshouldbemadeofallcriticalfilessinceatapeerrorwillrenderabackuptapeuseless.
There are many commercial backup utilities. Marcus and Stern provide many useful features to
use in an evaluation of a commercial product. In addition, other considerations include the
durationofthebackupwindow,backupscheduling(bothcompleteandincrementalbackups),and
thehandlingandstorageofbackuptapes.
The only purpose of backing up data is so that it can be restored. Just as with the backup
procedures,therestorationofthedatamustbethoroughlytested.
System Operations
System administration plays a large part in achieving high availability. Maintenance plans and
processes must be in place. Change is a constant. Changes must be documented and well
tested. One must control the change rate to prevent confusion and consequent failure. The
distribution of files must be automated. There are good change management tools to aid in this
endeavor.
Spare parts policies must be established. They define what spares, if any, will be kept on site.
RAID disk replacements are a good candidate since RAID disks are inexpensive, critical, and
failure-prone. Good preventive maintenance procedures will extend the life of components and
maydetectfailingcomponentsearly.
Environmentaland physicalissues mustbe thought out.Theseinclude the planning for adequate
space with the proper power and cooling, security, water, fire protection, and the need for
occasionalnewconstruction.Vendorsmustbemanaged.
7
Thisdocumentmaynotbedistributedinanywaybyelectronicmeans.
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Disaster Recovery
Disasters that can take out a single site include the loss of building power or power in a wider
area, flood, fire, earthquake, tornado, terrorism, and many others. Recovery from such disasters
requiresageographicallyseparatedisasterrecoverysite.
This site must be properly populated with the required processors, disks, telecommunication
facilities, and licensed software as well as with desks, telephones, and other facilities needed by
thepersonnelatthatsite.
Finally, once in place, the failover procedures to the backup site must be thoroughly and
frequentlytested.
The Bottom Line
High availability is insurance for your business. The amount that you are willing to spend on it
dependsonwhatdowntimewillcostyou.Ifdowntimecosts yourbusiness$100,000perhour,itis
certainly justifiable to spend $25,000 on shortening each outage by thirty minutes. But if
downtimecostsyourbusiness$1,000perhour,thisexpendituremaynotbeworthit.
The bottom line is that the requirements for high availability and its worth are different for every
business. Blueprints for High Availability provides the background required to effectivelyevaluate
theavailability/costtradeoffforyourbusiness.
8
Thisdocumentmaynotbedistributedinanywaybyelectronicmeans.
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

