HP’s Active/Active Home Location Register
November2006
The HP Home Location Register is a NonStop active/active system that provides mobile
subscriber location and profile information to the cellular network. This system is currently being
usedby36serviceprovidersonfivecontinentsserving200millionsubscribers.
We will first describe the role of the HLR in cellular networks, and will then take a closer look at
HP’sactive/activeimplementationofanHLR.
What is an HLR?
Unless you are immersed in cell-phone technology, you may not know what a Home Location
Register, or HLR, is. It is, in fact, the brains of a cellular telephone network. The cell towers and
switches are the arms and legs of the network, but it is the HLR that is responsible for knowing
whereyouareandtheservicestowhichyouareentitled.
Knowing where you are is critical because as a mobile subscriber, you could be anywhere. Even
worse, you could be on the move, changing cell towers and switches frequently during a single
callconnection.
The services for which HLR is responsible include those services for which you have paid, such
as call waiting and encryption, as well as the current state of services over which you have
control, such as call forwarding. HLR’s responsibility for services is to authenticate who you are
andthentoauthorizetheservicestowhichyouareentitled.
Your current location and your authorized services are all contained in a subscriber database in
some HLR assigned to you as your home HLR.1 Any switch in the network must be able to
accessanysubscriberdatabaseinthenetworkinreal-timetogetthisinformation.
In the early days of cell telephones, the HLR function was included in the service providers’
switches. It was these switches that received call requests from cell phones and established
connections to the called parties. Therefore, it was only logical that they track mobile users and
providethemwiththeirsubscribedservices.
However, this gave the switch manufacturers an inordinate power over the marketplace. If a
service provider wanted to add or modify a particular function or service, it could only go to the
switchmanufacturerandpaysometimesamilliondollarsormoreperswitchfornewfunctionality.
Consequently, there was a movement to standardize interfaces so that the HLR functions could
bemovedoffoftheswitchesandintoaseparatesystemunderthecontroloftheserviceprovider.
1
Theterm“homeHLR”mayseemredundant.However,inthisarticle,weusethetermHLRasanacronym,ignoringthat
the“H”alsostandsfor“home.”
1
.
©2006SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Inthis way,serviceproviders couldoffer newfeatures totheir subscribers atafractionof thecost
andinamuchtimeliermanner.
ThuswasborntheindependentHLRmarketplace.
The HLR in Action
The HLR works on your behalf all the time. Any call attempt to your number will involve your
homeHLR.
Location
Assuming that you are in a serviced area, as soon as you turn on your cell phone it starts
searching for signals being transmitted from cell towers in your vicinity. It may receive signals
from several service providers. If a signal from the service provider with whom you are signed up
is received, your cell phone locks onto that signal. Otherwise, it will lock onto the signal from
anotherserviceprovider.2
Via this signal, you are now connected to a local switch managed by the pertinent service
provider.Thisswitchisknownas yourservingswitch.
Cellular numbers are allocated in blocks of 10,000. In effect, the first six digits of your telephone
number identify your home HLR and your home switch. Your home switch is known as your
gateway switch. Thus, knowing your telephone number, the serving switch can determine which
HLRis yourhomeHLR.
1.turnon
2.location 2.location
network
3.profile 3.profile
serving
subscriber's
switch
homeHLR
Registration
Via your gateway switch, your serving switch will inform your home HLR as to your current
location.TheHLRregistersyourservingswitchinitssubscriberdatabaseasyourcurrentlocation
andreturns yourprofile.Therecanbeupto500orsoparametersinyourprofile,dependingupon
the network technology. At this point, your home HLR knows where you are; and your serving
switchknowstheservicestowhichyouareentitled.
PlacingaCall
When you want to place a call, you dial the number you are calling and push Send. This sends
the number via a cell tower to your serving switch – that switch which serves the cell tower
closesttoyou.
2
Thisisknownas“roaming.”Roamingconnectionsusedtobehandleddifferentlyandincurredextracharges;butwith
theadventofHLRsystems,thisdistinctionhasallbutdisappeared.Ineffect,allcallsarenowroamingcalls.
2
.
©2006SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

The first task for your serving switch is to determine where the party you are calling is currently
located. That information is contained in the called party’s home HLR. Your call is routed to the
called party’s gatewayswitch.When the call arrives, the called party’s gatewayswitch queries its
associated HLR to find the switch with which that cell phone is currently registered (this having
beendeterminedinthesamewayasdescribedearlier).
calledparty's
homeHLR
1.dial
TLDN:temporaryline
directorynumber
2.where? 3.callrequest
4.TLDN 4.TLDN
5.callrequest
callingparty's calledparty's
servingswitch servingswitch
PlaceaCall
Rather than returning the called party’s location to your serving switch, the HLR passes on the
call request to the switch which is registered as the called party’s serving switch. That switch
returns a special telephone number through the HLR to your registered switch. This telephone
number is called a temporary line directory number, or TLDN, and is a number that your switch
willusetocontactthecalledparty’sservingswitchtonegotiateacallestablishment.
EstablishingtheCall
At this point, the called party’s serving switch will work with your serving switch to establish a
connection between you and your called party. Once this has been accomplished, your called
party’sphoneispaged.Ifthephoneisanswered,youcanbeginyourconversation.
4.talk 3.page
4.talk
2.connection
TLDN
1.negotiate
callingparty's calledparty's
servingswitch servingswitch
ConnectaCall
Attheendoftheconversation,oneofyouhangsup;andtheswitchesclosetheconnection.
If one end of thecall is aregular phoneand not a cell phone, the procedure is similar exceptthat
there is norecord of thefixedtelephone inanyHLR. Theregular telephone deals witha land-line
switch rather than a serving cellular switch. If both ends are non-mobile phones, then the HLR is
notinvolved.
3
.
©2006SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

To improve efficiency and reduce call setup time, some switches will cache profile information in
their internal memory for as long as a subscriber is in their area. In that way, they can reduce
significantlytheamountoftraffictoremoteHLRs.
The Impact of Downtime
The loss of an HLR is a catastrophic event for the cellular network. Subscribers homed to that
HLR are, in effect, out of service. They cannot receive calls and in most cases cannot initiate
calls.However,governmentregulationsrequirethatserviceprovidersintheUnitedStates always
providea911connectionforemergencycalls.
Therefore, it is of utmost importance that the HLR be highly reliable. A typical HLR specification
calls for five 9s availability. Still, this is five minutes of downtime per year. Six or seven 9s is a
more appropriate level of availability (30 seconds or 3 seconds, respectively, of downtime per
year).
The HP NonStop HLR
TheAchievementofExtremeAvailabilities
HP’s HLR offering, part of its OpenCall suite of products for the telecommunications market, is
aimeddirectlyatthoseserviceproviders whodemandextremelyhighlevels of availability.Ituses
apairofNonStopserversinamatedpairactive/activeconfiguration.
Enscribe Enscribe
database database
location asynchronous location
switches profiles subscriber replication subscriber profiles switches
database database
HPNonStop HPNonStop
profile profile
HLRNodeA HLRNodeB
HPHLRMatedPair
admin admin
Since a single NonStop server has been field-proven to provide four 9s of availability, and since
an active/active system will fail over without delay to a surviving node in the event of a node
failure, availabilities well in excess of five 9s are achieved. (Theoretically, this configuration is
capable of providing eight 9s of availability as demonstrated in our article, Calculating Availability
– Redundant Systems, published in the October issue of the Availability Digest. However, highly
unlikely faults such as operator errors that can affect both nodes serve to compromise this
theoreticalavailabilitytosomeextent.)
TheHLRActive/ActiveConfiguration
The number of HLRs in a service provider’s network is a function of the size of the network, both
in terms of call volume and geographical distribution. Each HLR in a mated pair is seen by the
network as a separate and independent HLR. Thus, if a network has four mated pairs, it
functionallyhaseightHLRs.
4
.
©2006SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

However, each HLR is backed up by its companion in its mated pair. Each HLR contains a copy
of the other’s subscriber database and keeps it current via asynchronous replication. Should an
HLRfail,thesignaltransferpoints(STPs)inthenetwork (ineffect,thenetwork routers)recognize
the failure and have the intelligence to route all further requests to the backup HLR. Likewise,
whenthefailedHLRisreturnedtoservice,theSTPswillonceagainrouteappropriaterequeststo
therecoveredHLR.
The HP HLRs can be deployed in an “n+1” configuration. In this case, each HLR maintains
copies of the databases of n other HLRs. Should an HLR fail, the requests that it would normally
handle can be distributed across the remaining HLRs. This significantly eases the additional load
imposedonotherHLRsduringanHLRfailure.
To achieve the extremely high availabilities that HP is seeking with their HLR, there can be no
planned downtime. Zero! The mated pair and n+1 configurations allow zero downtime upgrades
by taking down one node at a time, upgrading it, returning it to service, and then repeating this
procedurefor another node.Duringthetimethatanodeis downfor upgrade,traffic is reroutedto
theotherHLRsjustasifthatnodehadfailed.
Memory-ResidentDatabasesforHighPerformance
In order to maximize the call volume that an HLR can handle, the entire subscriber database is
kept in memory. Therefore, no disk activity is required to respond to requests for location and
profile informationfrom the switches. As aconsequence,theHPHLR is incrediblyspaceefficient
andsupportsfivemillionsubscriberspersquaremeteroffloorspace.
A copy of the subscriber database is, of course, maintained on disk for initialization and
persistence.IntheHPHLR,thisiskeptinanEnscribedatabasetomaximizeperformance.
Whenever a change is made to a subscriber’s location or profile, this change is replicated to the
other HLRs in the active/active network, whether these HLRs are configured as a mated pair or
asann+1configuration.
Location changes are received from the switches. Profile changes can be received from
administrative staff entering new services to which the subscriber has subscribed or by the
subscriber himself (for instance, changing a call forwarding destination). Changes are replicated
inrealtimeandareavailableevenifthesubscriberisstillinthemiddleofacall.
AsynchronousReplication
Subscriber database changes are replicated among the HLR systems using HLR’s
asynchronous Application Database Synchronization (ADS) replication engine. ADS replicates
directly from the source’s memory-resident database to the target’s memory-resident database,
thusachievingveryshortreplicationlatencytimes.Whenamemory-residentdatabaseisupdated
byADS,thechangesarethenwrittentothedisk-residentcopyofthedatabase.
ADS is a specially developed replication engine for two reasons. First, it was needed long before
third-party replication engines were readily available – the first HP HLR system was installed in
theearly1990s.Second,theapplicationrequiredmemory-to-memoryreplicationratherthandisk-
to-diskreplication,acapabilitythatstillisnotgenerallysupportedbythirdpartyproducts.
TheHistoryofHP’sHLR
Thepathtotoday’s HPHLR has been alongone.Intheearly1990s,amajor third-partyprovider
to the Tandem marketplace, ACI, was acquired by US West. A US West customer, McCaw
5
.
©2006SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Cellular, saw the need for an independent HLR to free the service providers from the switch
manufacturers; and US West had ACI’s development staff develop the first HLR version. This
wassuccessfullyinstalledin1991.
There was a five-year hiatus before another HLR was sold, but then about forty systems were
soldoverthenextthreeyears..
US West then sold ACI with its HLR product line to Tandem Computers. Tandem allowed ACI
managementtobuyback thecompanybutitkepttheHLRproductline.Tandemwasthenbought
by Compaq along with Digital Equipment Corporation; and subsequently, Compaq was acquired
by HP. DEC also had a rich set of telecommunications products; and these products, along with
theHLRproduct,becamepartofHP’sOpenCallsuiteoftelcoproducts.
Summary
The Home Location Register is a very critical part of any cellular network. If it should fail, the
network fails. By using active/active technology and fault-tolerant nodes, HP is providing HLRs
withextremeavailabilitiestothecellularserviceprovidercommunity.
6
.
©2006SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
