Katrina – The Harsh Teacher
June2007
Theyear2005broughtwithitthelargestandmostdestructivehurricaneseasononrecordin
the United States. The queen of the season was hurricane Katrina, which was the most
devastating storm to hit the Gulf Coast Region in over 200 years. Its cost to the national
economicinfrastructure,estimatedtoexceed$200billiondollars,wasgreaterthananyother
storminthehistoryoftheUnitedStates.
Katrina taught us many painful lessons, 2005:ASeasonofFirsts
ranging from evacuation to
 Firstwith26namedstorms
communications, emergencymanagement,
tracking missing people, family reunion,  Firstwith13hurricanes
property security, protection of individuals,
 FirstwiththreeCategory5huricanes
municipal infrastructure, and a whole lot
more. Buried in these massive problems  Firstwithfourmajorhurricanes
were the corporate problems of business hittingtheUS
continuity. Source:NOAA2005
Whenwelook attheproblemsthatcompaniesintheareafacedasaresultofKatrina,theIT
infrastructure, though terribly important, was just one part of the multifaceted business
continuity problem. Shortly after the business effects of the storm began to dissipate, IBM
sharedtheir learningexperiencesinanin-depthWebseminar.1Patrick Corcoran,Directorof
Marketing and Strategy, IBM Business Continuity and Recovery Services, focused on the
broad range of problems which companies faced while trying to survive. These problems
included:
 People
 Communications
 Transportation
 Dataavailability
 BusinessContinuityPlancurrency
 Insurance
 Infrastructure
 Power
 Hardwarereplacement
We summarize his advice here, knowing that ”those who cannot remember the past are
condemnedtorepeatit.”2
1
D. Walch (IBM), P. Corcoran (IBM), B. Woodworth (IBM), M. Evanson (Oreck), Lessons Learned from the 2005
HurricaneSeason,IBMWebSeminar;January19,2006.
2
GeorgeSantayana,philosopherandpoet.
1
Thisdocumentmaynotbedistributedinanywaybyelectronicmeans.
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

People
Problems
The last thing on employees’ minds when Katrina hit was the corporate business. They were
protectingtheirfamiliesandproperty,ortheyweredisabledbytrauma.
Theydidn’tknow whattodoina disaster of this magnitude.Theydidn’tknow wheretogo or who
wasincharge.
Employee safetyhad often not been considered in the business continuityplan. Employees were
sometimesexpectedtoperformfunctionsthatweresimplynotpossibleorthatentailedhighrisk.
Little thought had been given to the personal needs of the company’s employees. There were no
plans to accommodate families, spouses, and children. There were no provisions for emergency
loansorotherfundsforemployees.
Actions
Companies must ensure that their employee needs are addressed in the business continuity
planning process and that roles are clearly defined. Alternate teams should be established to
assumetherolesofemployeeswhoareunabletofunction.
Communications
Problems
Therewas virtuallyno wayfor peopleto communicatewith each other.Landlinetelephones were
outof service.Cellphones could not be recharged.There was no wayto get onto the Internetfor
email.Therewasnowaytocommunicatewiththepublicsectoragencies.
Even if there had been a modicum of telephone service, there was no centralized number for
employees, customers, or partners to call for information, status or directions. Nor were there
planstoaddressthemedia.
Actions
Employees must be provided with a centralized number, email address, or Website for reporting
inandsharingstatusinformationassoonastheycancommunicate.
Satellite phones should be considered along with wireless cards for laptops and text messaging
services.
Transportation
Problems
People did not follow the directions of local agencies for evacuation in a timely and orderly
manner. Even if they did, there was little if any gasoline for their cars and limited air
transportation.Furthermore,thesupplyofrentalvehicleswasrapidlyexhausted.
Even for those “fortunate” few who had automotive transportation, roads had become parking
lots;andmanycarsbrokedownduetohightemperatures.
2
Thisdocumentmaynotbedistributedinanywaybyelectronicmeans.
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Actions
Encourage employees to follow evacuation guidelines regardless of the business continuity plan.
Try to anticipate a problem, and move key employees and their families as well as critical
corporatedataoutoftheaffectedareapriortotheproblem.
Planfor theavailabilityof hotels andcar rentals andbepreparedto haveasourceof gasolinefor
employeetravel.
DataAvailability
Problems
Magnetic tapebackups provedtobeamajor problem.Tapes wereoftenstored in affectedareas,
including offices that were no longer accessible. As a result, tapes, disks, and critical documents
wereseriouslydamagedordestroyed.
In many cases, tapes could not be shipped because of travel restrictions; or they got lost in
transit.
Ifbackuptapeswereavailableataremotesite,backupprocedureswereunknownorout-of-date.
Actions
Utilize electronic media such as virtual tape to send backup data and critical documents to
multipleremotelocations.Oneormoreoftheselocationsshouldbethecorporatebackupsite(s).
Ensure that system recovery procedures from the backup data are well documented and
frequentlytested.
BusinessContinuityPlanCurrency
Problems
Business Continuity Plans (BCPs) were either nonexistent or outdated. Often, BCPs were not
linked to a change management system so that they did not account for changes since the plan
waslastreviewedortested.
Suchplansthatdidexistweresometimesnotavailable,havingbeenstoredinthefacilitythatwas
destroyedorseverelydamaged.
BCPs were not typically linked to an Incident Command System so that they could be executed
aspartofalargerresponsetothedisaster.
Actions
Keep the Business Continuity Plan current and tested. It should be linked with the corporate IT
and business change management systems so that it can change as the business changes. It
shouldbetestedfrequently–atleastonceper yearormoreoften.
Keep the disaster recovery vendor, if any, current with respect to the changing BCP. Periodically
review the contract with the vendor to ensure that it adequately supports the BCP in its current
form.
3
Thisdocumentmaynotbedistributedinanywaybyelectronicmeans.
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Create an Incident Command System and a crisis team to manage the crisis. Plan on the
unavailabilityofsomeorallofthemembersofthecrisisteam.
Insurance
Problems
When it was too late, it was often discovered that insurance coverage was inadequate.
Management did not even know what disaster activities were covered. Fire is typically covered,
butdidtheinsurancecoverfloods?Winddamage?Socialunrest?
Tocompoundtheproblem,thereoftenwasnorecordedinventoryofassetsthatcouldidentifylost
or damaged propertyfor the claims adjuster, nor was there documentation of activities relating to
thepreservationofthoseassets.
Actions
Understand all risks associated with disasters, and ensure that they are adequately covered by
insurance.
Keep a current inventory of all assets, and document all employee and other activities (police,
fire,etc.)throughoutthedisaster.
Periodicallyobtainanindependentreviewofthecompany’sinsurancecoverage.
Infrastructure
Problems
Companyfacilities werelocated in high risk areas.Theresult of the disaster madethese facilities
unusableduetostructuraldamage,contamination,ormold.
Criticalassetswereoftenstoredinsusceptibleareassuchasbasements.
Mobilesolutionssometimesdidn’tworkinaffectedareas.
Actions
Evaluate the risks and vulnerabilities of the corporate facility locations. Ensure the security of the
facilities and their accessibility during and following a disaster. With these in mind, conduct a
vulnerabilityassessmentofcorporatefacilities.
Arrange contracts with vendors ahead of time for the repair and cleaning of each facility, if so
required.
Power
Problems
Power outages were almost complete in the area. There were no estimates for the duration of
poweroutages(infact,thiscouldbeweeksinsomeareasfollowinghurricaneKatrina).
4
Thisdocumentmaynotbedistributedinanywaybyelectronicmeans.
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Manycompanieshadinadequateornobackuppower suppliessuchasUPSordieselor gasoline
generators.Somegeneratorswouldn’tstart.Whendieselorgasolinegeneratorswereavailable,it
oftenwasimpossibletokeepthemrefueled.
Generators were often poorly located, such as in basements where they were flooded or on
rooftopswheretheywereblownoff.
Actions
Ensure that backup power sources are regularly tested and that fuel is fresh. Reevaluate the
locationofbackuppowersupplies.
Have contacts in place to acquire additional backup generation capacity if needed. Above all,
ensure an adequate fuel supply for the generators for the maximum anticipated duration of a
poweroutage.
HardwareReplacement
Problems
The hurricane damaged a significant amount of equipment and left remaining equipment without
power. There were no plans to relocate equipment to an alternate location, even if this had been
possible.
There were no plans to dispose of damaged equipment or to replace such equipment. Service
contractswereincompleteanddidnotanticipateadisasterofthismagnitude.
Actions
Consider acontractfor immediateacquisitionof new or usedhardware.Have vendors linedupto
relocateequipmentifrequired.
Understand and document the procedures for removing and relocating equipment and for the
disposalofdamagedequipment.
Summary
Each of the above categories represents key areas that should be addressed when creating or
updating a Business Continuity Plan. Even if the company has a remote backup site that is
standing by with current backup data just in case of a disaster, the problems of communication
with employees and getting them to the backup site still exist as do the follow-on problems of
insuranceandfacilityrepairorreplacement.AllofthesemustbeaddressedintheBCP.
Aseverehurricanesuchas Katrinais onlyoneofmanypossibledisasters.Therearetheobvious
ones, such as fires, floods, and earthquakes. But what about those that are not so obvious, such
as facility quarantining due to disease or contamination (remember the anthrax scare);
unthinkable terrorist actions, such as 9/11; wide area power blackouts, such as the 2003
Northeast Blackout that extended for hundreds of miles throughout the United States and
Canada;andsocialunrest.
As we have discussed in much of our content in the Availability Digest, a powerful approach to
disaster tolerance is an active/active system. With such a system, two or more sites are actively
providing processing services with a common application accessing a common replicated
database withcopies at, or accessibleto,each processingnode. Shouldonesite betakenout by
a disaster, all that needs to be done is to switch users from that node to an alternate surviving
5
Thisdocumentmaynotbedistributedinanywaybyelectronicmeans.
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

node. Providing that a user still has access to communication facilities, that user is up and
runninginseconds.Thereisnoproblem withcommunicatingwithemployeesorwithgettingthem
to a backup site since the surviving nodes in the active/active application network are already in
full production with a full complement of staff.Of course, the damaged or destroyed site needs to
berepairedorreplaced.Butthatcanwaitforanotherday.
6
Thisdocumentmaynotbedistributedinanywaybyelectronicmeans.
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
