Active/Active Save #1: Coffee Pot Takes Down Node
November2006
If it hadn’t been running in an active/active configuration, this mission-critical system would have
been taken down by, of all things, a coffee pot. As it turned out, only one of its nodes was
sensitive to caffeine. The system survived because the users at the failed node were switched
quicklytosurvivingnodes.
However, as most catastrophic faults go, there was a chain of events that led to this failure.
Breakinganylinkinthischainwouldhavepreventedthefailure.
Hereisthestory.
The Rolling Upgrade
Afterrunningitsactive/activenetwork successfullyforseveralyearsonitsexistingequipment,the
companydecidedtoupgradetothenextversionofthesystemthatitwasusingforitsnodes.This
was a major upgrade involving new hardware and a new operating system. The company had
successfully applied rolling upgrades to its nodes in the past by taking down one node at a time,
upgradingit,andreintroducingitintothesystem.
Event 1 – Not Enough Power Connectors
As best practices dictate, the system at each node was powered by a separate circuit protected
by an uninterruptible power supply (UPS). When the new system was rolled in at one of the
nodes, it was found that all of the UPS power connectors were being used. There was not one
availableforthenewsystem.Asaconsequence,thenewsystemcouldnotbepoweredup.
So as not to delay the upgrade, the node was temporarily connected to the facility’s unprotected
power. Though this power source was not protected by a UPS, the plan was to correct this
probleminshortorderbyaddinganadditionalconnectortotheUPSoutput.
Event 2 – Forgotten Task
Evidently, no record was made of this issue on any task list. The required power connector
changewasforgotten;andtheupgradedsystemcontinuedtorunsuccessfullyforquiteawhileon
theunprotectedpowersource.
1
©2006SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Event 3 – The Coffee Pot
As time went on, the load on the unprotected circuits gradually increased as the company grew.
More and more people meant more lighting, more heating, more air conditioning, and more
workstations.
One fateful day, an employee performed a normal, everyday task. He or she plugged in the
coffee pot to make fresh coffee. This was the straw that broke the camel’s back. The coffee pot
blew the circuit breaker, taking down everything that was on that circuit. This included dropping
primarypowertotheupgradedsystem,whichhadneverbeenmovedtotheUPScircuit.
protected primary
nodesystem power power
UPS
house
power
internal
UPS
The Coffee Connection
Event 4 – The System’s Internal UPS
The node, however, kept on running for a while. It was supported by an internal UPS that kept it
operating long enough to save its state and to shut it down gracefully following a primary power
failure.
Fast action on the part of the staff at the site restored the primarypower in just 35 seconds – an
admirable feat. Unfortunately, the system’s internal UPS only lasted for 30 seconds. The node
shutdownandsuffereda30-minuteoutageuntilitwasbroughtbackonline.
The Active/Active Save
If the system had not been an active/active system, its users would have been denied service for
a half hour. However, as it turned out, the users assigned to the failed node were quickly
switchedovertosurvivingnodesandsufferednoapparentoutage.
Once the node was brought back up, its users were switched back to it; and the active/active
systemwasreturnedtonormalservice.
2
©2006SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Lessons Learned
As is the case with most failures of fault-tolerant systems, a chain of errors led to this failure. If
anylinkinthischainhadbeenbroken,thefailurewouldnothaveoccurred.
Proper installation planning would have ensured that the correct power connector was available.
Giventhiserror,theinstallationcouldhavebeendelayeduntiltheproperconnectorwasinstalled.
Given that this was not done, an effective task list of “to-dos” would have ensured that the
situation would not have been forgotten and that the connector would have been installed shortly
aftertheupgrade.
Every one of these problems was a link in the error chain. With these links intact, the rest of the
story was inevitable. No one can fault the person who plugged in the coffee pot, nor can the
systembefaultedbecauseithadonlya30-secondinternalUPS.Thestagewassetfordisaster.
Only the company’s active/active architecture saved it from a perhaps costly and embarrassing
totalsystemfailure.
3
©2006SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
