Calculating Availability – Environmental Faults
April2007
In our previous six issues, we have looked at the impact of various strategies and failure
mechanismsontheavailabilityofaredundantsystem.Thesehaveincluded:
 theimpactofredundancy
 theimpactofrepairstrategies
 theimpactofnoderecoveryandsystemrestoretimes
 theimpactofcontinuingimprovementsinhardwarereliability
 theimpactoffailovertime
 theimpactoffailoverfaults
System outages are caused bymanyfactors, including hardware failure, software bugs, operator
errors, and environmental problems. We have considered all of these factors in our previous
articles except for the impact of environmental faults. In this article, we complete our analysis of
availability by considering faults due to such events as power, fire, flood, earthquakes,
hurricanes,socialunrest,andmaliciousacts.
Availability Review
To pick up where we left off, we had developed the following availability relationship for a
redundantsystemwithasinglespareandwithparallelrepair:1
r/2Rn(n1)
F (1a)2 hardware/softwarefaultswith parallelrepair
r/2 2
MTFO
 n(1a) failovertime (1)
r
R
p n(1a) failoverfaults
r
where
F istheprobabilitythatthesystemwillbeunavailable.
r isthetimerequiredtoreturnanodetoservice(hardwarerepair timeplus node
recoverytime).
R isthetimetorestorethesystemtoserviceonceanodehasbeenrecovered.
n isthenumberofnodesinthesystem.
a istheavailabilityofanode.
MTFO isthemeantimetofailoverfromafailednodetoanoperablenode.
1
EnvironmentalfaultsareanalyzedinmoredetailinChapter2, ReliabilityofDistributedComputingSystems,Breaking
theAvailabilityBarrier:AchievingCenturyUptimeswithActive/ActiveSystems,AuthorHouse:2007.
1
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

p istheprobabilitythatafailoverwillfail(afailoverfault).
Thisrelationshipgives the probabilitythatthesystem willbeunavailabletoitsusers.Itcoversthe
casesinwhichtwonodesinthesingly-sparedsystem failduetoahardwareorsoftwarefailureor
due to an operator error, thus taking down the system; in which one node has failed and the
system is unavailable while it fails over to a spare node; and in which a failover attempt fails. It
assumes parallel repair. This means that each failed node is being worked on independently to
returnittoservice.Thatis,therearerepairpersonnelateachfailedsite.
If thereis onlyonerepair persontoserviceallfailures, onlyonenodeatatimewillbe workedon.
This is the case of sequential repair. In this case, the factors of 1/2 disappear in the first term of
theaboverelationship.
The case of multiply-spared systems is considered in our first article in this series. Entitled
Calculating Availability – Redundant Systems, it was published in the Availability Digest issue of
October, 2006. If there are multiple spares in the system, the first term is modified as shown in
thatarticle.
Asymmetric Availability
We normally think of a redundant system as a network of like nodes. In our relations, we have
representedtheavailabilityofanodebythesymbola.
However, this changes when we consider environmental faults. Though the system in Florida
may be identical to the system in Idaho, the real availabilities of these systems may be quite
different.ItisnotunlikelythattheFloridasystem willbetakendownbyahurricane.However,itis
much less likely that the system in Idaho will suffer an outage due to a natural disaster (a prairie
fire,perhaps).Ifweacceptthis,overthelongruntheFloridasystemwillbedownmoreoftenthan
theIdahosystemandthereforewillhavealoweravailability.
Thus, by considering environmental faults, we are now faced with asymmetric availabilities
throughout the application network. Each node has a different availability, and our availability
relationshipsmustbemodifiedtoaccommodatethis.
Calculating Nodal Availability with Environmental Faults
To calculate the availability of a node that may experience environmental faults, we must first
evaluate the effect of each kind of environmental fault. This means that we must estimate the
probability that each fault may occur and how long the system will be down should that sort of
fault occur. Since environmental faults are generally few and far between, this is at best an
inexactscience.However, reasonable guesses canbemade;andparameters canbemodified to
play“what-if”games.
Letusdefinethefollowingtermsforaparticularnodeinthesystem:
a Istheavailabilityofnodei.
i
f istheprobabilityofnodefailureofnodei.
i
mtbf is the mean time before failure of the node due to a system fault (hardware,
software,operatorerror).
mtr isthemeantimetorecoverthenodefollowingasystemfault.
mtbe isthemeantimebetweenfailureofthenodeduetoanenvironmentalfault.
mtre isthemeantimetorecoverthenodefollowinganenvironmentalfault.
2
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Theprobabilitythatthenodewillbedownduetoasystemfaultis
mtr mtr

mtbfmtr mtbf
Likewise,theprobabilitythatthenodewillbedownduetoanenvironmentalfaultis
mtre mtre

mtbemtre mtbe
Thus,theprobabilityoffailureofthenodei,f,is
i
mtr mtre
f  
i mtbf mtbe
and
a 1f
i i
If there are several environmental faults of concern, the probability of nodal failure due to an
environmentalfaultisthesumoftheindividualfailureprobabilities,mtre/mtbe.
As an example, let us consider a node with a system mtbf of 4000 hours (about six months) with
anmtroffourhours.Thissystemthereforehasafailureprobabilityof4/4000=.001(three9s).
Now let us consider environmental faults. Let us assume that the system will be taken out once
every ten years (3652 days) by a hurricane and will require one day to return it to service.
Furthermore, it will experience an area power failure about once every 8,000 hours (about once
per year); and the backup diesel power system will fail once every ten times, resulting in a node
failure due to a power outage once every 80,000 hours. When the power backup system fails, it
will take 8 hours to bring the system back into service. Therefore, the probability of failure due to
anenvironmentalfaultis
1 8
 .00038
3,652 80,000
and the nodal failure probability is .001 + .00038 = .00138. The node availability has been
reduced from .999 to .99862. Environmental faults have added over one third to the system
downtime.
Two-Node Systems
Givenapropercalculationoftheavailabilityforeachnode,acalculation whichtakesintoaccount
environmental faults, our previous analysis holds. Let us consider a two-node system with
availabilitiesofa anda respectively.
1 2,
DualNodeFailure
The probability that both nodes will fail is (1-a )(1-a ). Given a node recovery time of r and a
1 2
system restoretimeofR,thefirstterm inEquation(1),whichgivestheprobabilitythatthesystem
willbedownduetoadualnodefailure,becomes
r/2R
(1a )(1a )
r/2 1 2
3
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

FailoverTimes
Likewise, we can adjust the expression for failover time. A failover will occur whenever a single
node fails. In our previous analysis, we noted that an n node system in which each node has an
availability of a will experience a node failure with a probability of n(1-a). In our current example,
the probability that node 1 will fail is (1-a ); and the probability that node 2 will fail is (1-a ).
1 2
Therefore, the probability of a single node failure is (1-a )+ (1-a ), or (2-a -a ); and our previous
1 2 1 2
expression for system downtime during failover given by the second term in Equation (1)
becomes
MTFO
(2a a )
r 1 2
FailoverFaults
Afailover fault occurs with aprobabilityof p whenever afailover occurs, which,as argued above,
will occur with a probability of (2-a -a ). Therefore, the third term in Equation (1), which gives the
1 2
probabilityofsystemdowntimeduetoafailoverfault,becomes
R
p (2a a )
r 1 2
SystemDowntime
The resulting probability of the system being down when environmental faults are considered is
thesumoftheabovethreeterms:
r/2R
F (1a )(1a ) hardware/softwarefaultswithparallelrepair
r/2 1 2
MTFO
 (2a a ) failovertime (2)
r 1 2
R
p (2a a ) failoverfaults
r 1 2
Active/ActiveSystems
As we saw in our previous analyses, if an n-node redundant system is active/active, only 1/n of
the users are affected byfailover times and failover faults. Therefore, these terms in Equation (2)
shouldbedividedbyafactorof2(n=2)foratwo-nodeactive/activesystem.
N-Node Systems
Equation(2)canbeextendedtoann-nodesystem withasinglespare.Thedowntimeexpression
forthiscasebecomes
r/2R 1 MTFOpR 
F   (1a )(1a ) na (3)
i j i
r/2 2 i ji r i
The ½ factor before the double summation sign is needed because the double summation adds
eachpairtwice.
Again, if the redundant system is active/active, the last term for the system downtime due to
failovertimeandfailoverfaultsshouldbedividedbynsinceonly1/nusersareaffected.
4
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

A Caveat
Intheaboveequations,wehaveassumedthatthetimetoreturnanodetoservice,r.isthesame
for all nodes. If this is not the case, then the factor (r/2+R)/(r/2) must be modified. The correct
valuecanbedeterminedbyanalyzingthestatediagramfortheparticularconfiguration.2
Summary
We have extended our availability equations to include the possibility of natural and manmade
disasters which can take down a system. The effect of such environmental faults is to reduce the
availabilityofanode.
If the nodes are geographically dispersed, it is likely that each will be subject to a different set of
environmental hazards. Therefore, the various nodes will exhibit different availabilities. The
modification of the availabilityrelationships to account for environmental faults takes into account
thisavailabilityheterogeneity.
The modified relationships extend beyond environmental faults to any set of nodes whose
availabilitycharacteristicsaredifferentfrom eachother.Forinstance,thisanalysis canbeapplied
to processing networks in which the nodes are configured differently or are from different
vendors.
2
SeeAppendix3,FailoverFaultModels,BreakingtheAvailabilityBarrier:SurvivableSystemsforEnterpriseComputing,
AuthorHouse;2004,forexamplesofthissortofanalysis.
5
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
