Active/Active Data Centers
December2013
Thelifeweleadtodayispoweredmoreandmorebytechnology.Inadditiontothemicro-
technologies we find in our microwaves and automobiles, we depend extensively on the
macro-technologies of massive data centers. These data centers help us to manage our money, make
investments, control our health, shop online, communicate with family and friends, play the lotteries, and
completeoureducation.
ITserviceshavenowbecomesoimportanttousthatweexpectthem tobeavailablearoundtheclock,on
a 24x7x365 basis. A decade ago, if a service was down for a few hours, that was often expected. This
amount of downtime was important to provide periodic planned windows for upgrades and maintenance.
However, the amount of acceptable downtime today has moved from hours to minutes and even to
seconds for many applications. For these applications, planned downtime is even unacceptable.
Downtime can cost an organization significant amounts of money. Perhaps even worse, in this day of
instant communication with the likes of Twitter, a company’s reputation can be seriously damaged if it
experiencesdowntimethatnegativelyimpactsitscustomers.
Therequirementfor extremeavailabilityhas ledto the deploymentbymanyorganizations of active/active
data centers, in which no component failure or even the loss of an entire data center will affect the
servicesthatarebeingprovided.Thesenewdatacentershavebeenexceptionallyreliable.
Forrester Research and the Disaster Recovery Journal jointly conducted a survey of top management to
determine their views on today’s availability requirements.1 The survey was commissioned by EMC
Corporation.Thefindingsofthissurveyaresummarizedbelow.
Disaster Recovery, High Availability, and Continuous Availability
Today’sserviceavailabilityexpectationshavecreatedahierarchyofavailabilitysolutions:
Disaster Recovery (DR) means that the IT service can be restored eventually following an outage.
Recovery is a manual operation. Typically, a periodic copy of the database is kept offsite, and backup
systems are provided. To recover from an outage, the database is loaded onto a backup system, the
applications are loaded, the system is tested, and it can then be put into service. Recovery can take
hours to days. The possibilityof a failover fault, in which the backup system cannot be put into service, is
significant.
HighAvailability(HA)meansthatrecoverycanbeachievedinatimeframerangingfrom afewminutesto
a few hours. An availability of five 9s (less than five hours per year of downtime) is generally considered
high availability. Recovery is highly automated. High availability systems typically replicate the database
to a standby system at a remote site. Thus, in the event of an outage, the database does not need to be
1HowOrganizationsAreImprovingBusinessResiliencyWithContinuousAvailability,ForresterResearchReport;2013.
1
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

loaded.Theapplicationsmustbebroughtup,theymustconnecttothedatabase,andthesystemmustbe
testedbeforeitcanbeputintoservice.Failoverfaultsarealsoaworryforhigh-availabilitysystems.
Continuous Availability means that recoveryis so fast that no one notices that there was an outage, or at
least they were not inconvenienced by it. Continuous availability is achieved via active/active systems in
which a live copy of the application is running on two or more systems. The system databases are kept
synchronized via data replication. A transaction can be sent to anysystem in the application network and
be processed properly. If a system fails, all that needs to be done is to route all transactions to surviving
systems. Failover faults are not a problem because the surviving systems are known to be working.
Furthermore, planned downtime is eliminated because any one system can be taken offline for
maintenancepurposeswithoutaffectingserviceavailability.
The Forrester Research Study
Everyweek thereisnewsofanotherorganizationsufferingamajoroutage(manyofwhicharereportedin
our Never Again series). Human error, a botched upgrade, an unsuccessful recovery from a power
failure,orafailoverfaultcanbringasystemtoitsknees,oftenforhoursordays.
The Forrester/DRJ studyfound that 82% of organizations felt that the risk to IT systems was rising. Their
top concerns were technology dependency (48%), business complexity (37%), and extreme weather
(36%).
TechnologyDependency
Technology for the data center is expanding at an ever increasing rate. Multicore servers are getting
faster and greener, requiring less power, less cooling, and less floor space. Storage capacities are
increasing.Deduplicationtechnologyis revolutionizing archiveprocedures.Networks arebecomingfaster
andmorereliable.Thesophisticationofoperatingsystemsandapplicationsareimproving.
This means that data centers are frequently updating their hardware and software. In order to meet their
SLAs, these upgrades must be accomplished in ever-diminishing maintenance windows. Ultimately, the
maintenancewindowsdisappear,andupgradesmustbemadewithoutdegradingservice.
As a consequence, any mistakes made during a carefully planned upgrade can lead to significant
extended downtime. Since upgrades are occurring frequently, upgrade errors can destroy compliance
withSLAs.
BusinessComplexity
There used to be a one-to-one relationship between a business process and the application that
supportedit.Nomore.Today,dozensofapplicationsinteroperatetoimplementabusinessprocess.Even
worse, these applications are maintained by a variety of organizations, from internal IT to partners and
cloud providers. If any of these applications should go down, the business process is impacted or even
disabled.
In this environment, the failure of a seemingly non-critical application can disrupt an entire business
process. Consequently, more and more applications are being deemed to be mission critical or business
critical. Because their SLAs now require recovery in minutes or even seconds, disaster-recovery and
high-availabilitystrategiesarenolongeradequate.Continuousavailabilityisrequired.
ExtremeWeatherandNaturalDisasters
The organizations surveyed felt that extreme weather is the most common cause of a major business
interruption, followed closely by power failures. Extreme weather like Superstorm Sandyhas the abilityto
take out entire data centers. Furthermore, it can lead to cascading events like power failures, fuel
shortages,networkoutages,andfloods.
2
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Continuous Availability
As the result of tightening SLAs and the increasing risks for outages, many organizations are moving to
continuously available data-center architectures. In these organizations, disaster recovery and high
availability look like they did years ago. Backup images are replicated to a remote site where standby
systemsareavailable,Recoverytimesaremeasuredinhoursordays,andfailoverfaultsareacontinuing
concern.
The new look for mission-critical and business-critical applications is continuous availability via
active/active architectures.2 In an active/active system, multiple geographically distributed systems
actively run the same application. A transaction can be sent to any of the systems and be processed
properly. If a system should fail, all that needs to be done is for its transactions to be routed to surviving
systems. It is known that these systems are operating properly because they are currently processing
transactions. Therefore, there is no concern about
failover faults; and there is no management delay while it server
is decided whether it would befaster torecover thefailed
data
systemorfailovertoitsbackup. base
users
replication
In order for multiple systems to be processing users
server
transactionsforacommonapplication,theymustallhave
data
the same view of the application database. Though this redundant base
users network
could be accomplished by having the systems connect to
a common remote database, network latency makes this
infeasible. Rather, each system has its own local copy of server replication
the database. The database copies are kept users data
base
synchronized by data replication. Whenever a change is
made to one copy of the database, it is immediately
AnActive/ActiveNetwork
replicatedtoallotherdatabases.
Another advantage of active/active systems is that the systems do not have to be identical. They can
even be from different manufacturers. In an active/passive environment, the production and backup
systemstypicallyhavetobeidentical.Thiscanbeaproblem tomaintainandleadstomanyfailoverfaults
inthesearchitectures.
Someapplicationscannotruninadistributedenvironment.Onlyonecopyoftheapplicationcanbeactive
at any one time. Even in this case, an active/active architecture can be used to advantage. The
application is run in only one system, but the changes that it is making to its database are replicated to
theothersystem.Shouldtheprimarysystem fail,allfurthertransactionsareroutedtothebackupsystem,
which will take over transaction processing immediately. It can be assured that the backup system is
operating properly by sending it occasional test messages. This configuration is known as a “sizzling-hot
standby.”
An alternative to active/active systems is x86 virtualization. In this architecture, multiple virtual machines
(VMs)runonasinglephysicalhostserver.AVMisrepresentedbyanexecutablestoredoncommondisk
storage accessible by all physical host servers. To instantiate a VM, all that is required is to boot its
executable(includingitsguestoperatingsystemandallapplications)ontoaphysicalhostserver.
VMs can be rapidly restarted should they fail and can be moved to surviving physical host machines
should their physical host fail. VMs can even be moved across data centers if their executables have
beenreplicatedbetweendatacenters.
2WhatisActive/Active?,AvailabilityDigest;October2006.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0101/what_is_active-active.pdf
3
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Both of these architectures achieve significantly higher availability than disaster-recovery architectures
without the cost of maintaining an idle backup data center or one that is running deferrable workloads.
Productionworkloadscanbeoperatingatalldatacenters.
The big difference between active/active systems and virtualized systems is recovery time. Active/active
systems recover in seconds and provide true continuous availability. Virtualized systems recover in
minutes,andtheir recoverytimes placethem moreinthehigh-availabilitycategorythaninthecontinuous
availabilitycategory.
Adoption of Active/Active Data-Center Architectures
The Forrester/DRJ study found that 44% of the responding organizations had adopted an active/active
architecture. Twelve percent had gone fully active/active, while 32% had opted for a sizzling-hot standby
architecture.
Of those organizations that had gone active/active, 89% agreed that the active/active architecture had
helped them combine their DR and HA architectures into a single architecture. They no longer had to
invest separately in HA for localized failures and DR for site failures, with the added burden of testing
themseparately.
Eighty-six percent of organizations that had gone active/active said that the move had reduced their
downtimeandthattheycouldeasilyextendtheavailabilitybenefitstobusiness-criticalapplications.
Fifty percent of those respondents that have not yet gone active/active said that they are not confident
thattheirDRsolutionisscalableorthatitwillachievetheirrecoveryobjectives.Fifty-fourpercentstruggle
to maintain up-to-date DR environments because of the rate of change in the configurations of their
productionsystems.
Fifty-eightpercentof allrespondingorganizations believethattoday’s off-the-shelftechnologyfor building
active/active systems is mature, and 46% of those organizations that have not yet gone active/active are
seriouslyinvestigatingit.
Summary
The organizations that were surveyed lacked confidence in existing DR solutions. They avoid invoking a
DR planunless absolutelynecessary.Theyfacethe decision of whether itis better to waitoutthecurrent
outageortoriskafailoverfaultwhiletryingtobringupthebackupsystem.
Organizations can move from a shaky DR environment to a solid continuously available environment by
adopting active/active architectures. These architectures will withstand the loss of critical components or
evenentire datacenters withoutcompromisingtheavailabilityof IT services.This is certainlyasignificant
journeyfor mostorganizations.3 However, the journeyis aided bydeveloping a roadmap that outlines the
changes to IT processes, architectures, and technology that must be made, and then proceeding one
stepatatime.
3OneBank’sMarchTowardsActive/Active,TheConnection;September/October2012.
4
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com