VMTurbo – Managing Virtualization
April2015
VMTurbo
VMTurbois amonitoringandmanagementtoolthatmaintains avirtualizeddatacenter in
the “Desired State.” VMTurbo defines the “Desired State” of a virtualized environment as that which
eliminatesinefficiencieswithoutcompromisingapplicationperformance.
Maintaining the Desired State is typically a complex, time-consuming, and error-
prone job requiring the skills of highly experienced engineers. The ever-changing
mix of applications coupled with the requirements to meet SLAs, to provide the
specified redundancy, and to comply with affinity rules require constant monitoring
andadjustmentof workloads across thevirtualizedinfrastructure.(Seeour companionarticleinthis issue
entitled“ManagingYourPrivateCloud.1)
Traditional virtualization performance tools that monitor VMware or Hyper-V use threshold-based alerts.
Whenametriccrossesathreshold,analertistriggeredandtheoperationsteammustdecidewhetherthe
alert is ‘smoke’ or ‘fire’. VMTurbo is a proactive management tool that maintains the virtualized
environment in the Desired State automatically. It prevents problems rather than issuing alerts indicating
thatthereareproblems.
Demand-Driven Control
Traditional virtualization management solutions leave it to the IT staff to monitor dashboards, alerts, and
reports and to make the appropriate reallocations of virtualized resources to keep the virtual machines
(VMs)incompliancewithcorporatepolices.
VMTurbo continuously monitors resource usage and automatically reassigns VMs to compute clusters to
maintain corporate policies. Each application is different and is governed by the requirements of its own
SLA. The set of SLAs (for perhaps hundreds or even thousands of applications) and other configuration
criteriarepresentthecorporateITpoliciesforthevirtualizedenvironmentandinclude:
 Applicationperformancecriteria,whetheritberesponsetimesorbatch-runningtimes.
 Themaximumallowableloadingofhostservers.
 Therequiredredundancyforeachapplication.
 Affinityrequirements:
- affinities - some applications should always run on the same host server for performance
reasons.
-anti-affinities–someapplicationsshouldneverrunonthesamehostserverforfailurereasons.
1ManagingYourPrivateCloud,AvailabilityDigest;April2015.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/1004/virtualized_data_center.pdf
1
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

 Loadbalancingtoevenouttheloadonvirtualizedresources.
 Recoverytoaremotesiteforcriticalapplications.
 Capacitymonitoringtodeterminefutureresourceexpansionrequirements.
VMTurbo willrecommendplacement,sizing, andstart/stopactions across hosts, clusters,and datastores
to prevent queuing, latency, and ballooning. As VMTurbo detects potential problems, it can automatically
reconfigurethe virtualenvironmenttopreventthose problems.Alternatively, itcan providesuggestions to
the IT staff to take to avoid problems. These suggestions are provided in an intuitive set of instructions
withtheabilityfortheITstafftoapproveanyofthesuggestions,whichthenVMTurbowillexecute:
VMTurbo Operations Manager
TheVMTurboOperationsManageristhebasicmoduleofVMTurbo.Itworkswiththehypervisorto
providethefollowingfunctionality:
Workload Multiplexing: Workloads with coincident load spikes are identified and placed on separate
physicalhostsordatastorestopreventcontentionandtoenablehighVMdensity.
Automatically prioritize mission-critical applications: VMs can be classified into criticality tiers. If
resources become constrained, lower tier applications are throttled and higher level tiers are
prioritizedtoassuremission-criticalperformance.
Assure redundancy: N + K redundancy (K spares in addition to the minimum number of hosts, N,
needed by the application) is guaranteed at all times to meet the SLAs of applications, even in
dynamicenvironments.
Future Planning: Incorporate growth and high availability together before the environment is out of
compliance.
2
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Test Fault Tolerance: Ensure that a host failure or a disaster recovery event is properly handled with
detailedworkloadplacementandresourcereconfigurationdecisions.
Disaster Recovery: Automaticallymanage the disaster recoveryenvironment to a remote data center
intheeventofadisaster.
Workload Reservations: Reserve space in the infrastructure for upcoming application deployments.
Issue alerts if the infrastructure can no longer support the anticipated load. Upon deployment of new
applications, identify on which targets (clusters, hosts, and datastores) each new VM should be
deployed.
Self-service provisioning: Integrates with cloud management platforms including vRealize
Automation, OpenStack, CloudStack, System Center Orchestrator and VMM to place new VMs
directly in the right cluster, datastore, and host depending upon the anticipated load so that existing
workloadsarenotimpacted.NewVMscanbebasedoncustomorpre-definedtemplates.
VMTurbo Control Module Extensions
The VMTurbo Control Modules extend the functions of the Operations Manager from the hypervisor into
each layer of the data center to provide tighter control of the Desired State and to further ensure
applicationperformanceandresourceutilizationefficiency.
 The Application Control Module discovers and manages applications as a single entity, enabling
policy-basedprioritizationfor tiers of service.Itunderstands thereal-timeperformancecharacteristics
oftheapplicationlayertomakeresourcingdecisionsthatensureperformanceacrosstheboard.
 The Network Control Module manages the tradeoffs between compute load, storage load, and
networktrafficflowtoutilizethenetworkresourcesasefficientlyaspossible.
 The VDI (Virtualized Desktop Infrastructure) Control Module controls the demand of I/O intensive
events such as reboots and patch updates to maintain the desired end-user experience without
havingtorunVDIdeploymentsonadedicatedoroverprovisionedinfrastructure.
 The Container Control Module extends the Operations Manager to manage containers, ensuring
theperformanceofcontainerizedapplications whileutilizingtheunderlyinginfrastructureas efficiently
aspossible.
 The Storage Control Module manages NetApp, HP 3PAR, EMC, and Pure Storage to extend the
controlcreatedforvirtualserverstothestoragelayer.
 The Fabric Control Module provides the complete visibility and control of Cisco’s UCS network
fabricandconvergedinfrastructureofferingssuchasVCEVblockandNetAppFlexPod.
 The Hybrid Cloud Control Module provides the intelligence to match applications workload
demands with the right resources, whether these resources reside in the data center private cloud,
thepubliccloud,orahybridcombination.
Free VMTurbo Services
VMTurboVirtualHealthMonitor
The VMTurbo Virtual Health Monitor is a free and unlimited virtualization monitoring and reporting tool. It
monitors compute, storage and network performance in a single dashboard. Its monitoring includes
heterogeneousenvironmentsusingVMware,Hyper-V,andXen.
3
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

VM metrics include vCPU, vMem, vStorage, I/Os, and latency. Host metrics include CPU, memory, I/Os,
network,swap,andballooning.StoragemetricsincludeI/Os,latency,capacity,andutilization.
BusinessImpactAssessment
In addition, VMTurbo also provides a free “Business Impact Assessment so that an organization can
clearly understand how effective it would be in mitigating the risks to which it is exposed in the event of
failures in key components of its virtualized infrastructure, including complete data center failures. The
assessmentinvolvesthefollowingsteps:
Scoping:ThescopeoftheBusinessImpactAssessmentisdetermined.
SoftwareDeployment:VMTurbo’sassessmentsoftwareisdeployed.
Data Collection: VMTurbo’s software automatically analyzes the target environment over a one-to
two-weekperiod.
Data Analysis: VMTurbo’s engineers perform a number of “what-if” simulations to determine the risk
towhichIToperationsmightbeexposedintheeventofdifferentfailurescenarios.
Executive Report: VMTurbo prepares a report detailing the results including technical and financial
analyses.
VMTurbo – The Company
Founded in 2009, VMTurbo’s charter is to transform IT operations in the cloud and virtualized
environments from a complex, labor-intensive, and error-prone process to one that is simple, automated,
and predictable. Its products ensure that applications get the resources required to meet corporate IT
policieswhilemaximizingtheutilizationofITassets.
With offices in New York, California, the United Kingdom, and Israel, VMTurbo is used at over 9,000
enterprisesworldwide.
Summary
Virtualization monitoring tools alert you when you have a problem and allow you to investigate. VMTurbo
activelymanages yourenvironmenttopreventalertsandproblemsfromoccurring.
VMTurbo can be deployed in about thirty minutes, meaning that the operations staff and engineering
teams canquicklytestand verifyhow VMTurbocancontroltheir virtualized environment.Withinone hour
of deployment, VMTurbo will identify begin identifying performance issues and provide the specific
actions to take to remedy the issues. It then continuously evaluates the changing demands of the
organization’s applications against the infrastructure availability to deliver and maintain the Desired State
ofthevirtualenvironment.
VMTurbo claims that its customers typically increase VM density by 20% to 40% without risking
degradation in their environment. They further claim that many VMTurbo customers have reduced their
infrastructureandlicensingcostsby40%to70%.
4
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com