NonStop AutoSYNC – Eliminating Configuration Drift
August2011
A major problem in active/passive systems is configuration drift. Typically, both the active
production system and the passive standby system must be identical – identical hardware,
operating system version, database management system, and application versions. Should the
production system fail, the applications must be started on the standby system to continue
service to the users. However, if some component – hardware or software – is different from the
productionsystem,theapplicationsmaynotexecuteproperlyormaynotrunatallonthestandby
system.Afailoverfaulthasoccurred.
Configurationdriftisoneofthemajorcausesoffailoverfaults.Becausetestingfailover issorisky
and expensive for many applications, exercising failover is often given short shrift by companies.
It is all too common for some version of a software application or a script to be changed on the
productionsystembutnotonthebackupsystem.
An important tool for ensuring that this situation does not occur is to use a facility that maintains
the software configuration of the two systems in synchronism. Such a tool is HP’s NonStop
AutoSYNCTMSoftwarebuiltforHPbyCarrScottSoftware,Inc.(www.carrscott.com).
HP NonStop AutoSYNC
FileandTableSynchronization
AutoSYNC automaticallyreplicates NonStop Enscribe files and SQL tables from asourcesystem
to a target system to maintain the two systems in synchronization. Files and tables to be
replicated are specified by file-set patterns. The file-set specifications may contain wild cards.
Both NonStop Guardian and OSS (Open System Services) operating-system personalities are
supported.Filecopyingcanbetoaremotesystem,tothelocalsystem,ortomultiplesystems.
AutoSYNC file replication is similar to data replication, which synchronizes two copies of a
database; but AutoSYNC focuses on files instead. Data-replication engines replicate individual
row or record updates to a database as they are made. AutoSYNC periodically copies to a
remotesystemthefilesthathavebeenaddedtoorchangedontheproductionsystem.
AutoSYNC is also useful when an application is distributed across several systems. It ensures
thatapplicationobjectsarethesameversiononeachsystemintheapplicationnetwork.
AutoSYNCallowsindividualuserstomanagetheirownsynchronizationsindependently.
1
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

SynchronizationModes
AutoSYNC can be used in one of two modes – one-time synchronization and scheduled
synchronization.
One-TimeSynchronization
Anyuser can use the SYNCHRONIZE command to copy a file set to which he has been granted
access. The file copy happens interactively, and the results are reported to the user. One-time
synchronizationrequiresappropriatepasswordsfortheremotesystem.
ScheduledSynchronization
A user can schedule file sets to be synchronized according to a time schedule or at specified
intervals. He does this by adding a file set to the AutoSYNC schedule via the ADD
SYNCFILESETcommand.Hemusthavebeengrantedaccesstothefilesthatheisscheduling.
TheresultsofscheduledfilesynchronizationsarereportedtotheAutoSYNClogfile.
UserAuthorization
Any user can use AutoSYNC to copy a single file set to which he has been granted access. An
AutoSYNC administrator must authorize users to schedule synchronizations. Such authorization
can include a maximum priority and the CPUs that can be used. The administrator can also
suspendandactivateusers.
SynchronizingExecutingPrograms
If an executable is currently running as one or more processes, it can still be optionally
synchronized. The existing executable is renamed, and the new executable is copied. Existing
processes are unaffected, but any new process instantiation will use the new executable. When
theoldexecutableisclosed,AutoSYNCdeletestherenamedfile.
Thesameprocedureisusedforanyothernonauditedfiletypethatiscurrentlyopen.
SynchronizingFilesBeingUpdated
A file that is open for infrequent updates can be synchronized. AutoSYNC has the ability to
synchronize only during certain time periods, likemidnight to 8AM. If AutoSYNC determines that
a file did, in fact, change during its replication, AutoSYNC will discard the copy and will try again
atitsnextsynchronizationinterval.
AutoSYNCFeatures
In many installations, file synchronization is performed by operators using manual or semi-
automated methods. This can be a primary source of configuration drift. In contrast, AutoSYNC
providesseveralbenefits:
 AutoSYNCsynchronizesfilesandtableswithoutoperatorintervention.
 AutoSYNC is implemented on top of the HP NonStop fault-tolerant, scalable
architecture. It continues to perform even in the presence of processor or process
failures
2
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

 AutoSYNC error reporting is integrated with the NonStop operating system.
Synchronization errors are logged to EMS (Event Management System) or to any other
specifiedreportingfacility.
 AutoSYNC ismanagedfrom asinglecommand-lineinterfaceandmaintainsanhistorical
recordofallsynchronizationactivity.
 AutoSYNC is secure. Users can synchronize only those files to which they have access
rights.
 Subvolumesandfilescanbemappedtoadifferentnameonthedestinationsystem.
 OSSfilescanbesynchronizedbydirectory.
 Synchronization may be parallelized by running multiple synchronization batches
simultaneously.
 Security provisions prevent the unauthorized replication, purging, or replacement of files
andtables.
SomeLimitations
There are certain files that AutoSYNC cannot replicate. Files that are opened exclusively cannot
be replicated as AutoSYNC cannot gain access to them. Likewise, corrupted source files are not
replicated.However,acorruptedtargetfileisalwaysreplacedregardlessofitstimestamp.
AutoSYNC does not coordinate the copying of an Enscribe file with its alternate key files.
Therefore,theremaybeabrief period in whichoneexists withouttheother.However, SQLindex
tablesarecoordinatedwiththeirbasetables.
AutoSYNC does not directly support the copying of file partitions. To accomplish this, source
partitions must be mapped to target volumes. However, if the primary partition is specified in the
sourcefileset,theentirefileissynchronized.
Triggers
Triggers allow auser torun aTACLor anOSSshellcommandafter everysuccessfulfilecopyor
after everysuccessful file-set copy. A TACL commandmayinvoke a TACLmacro, a script, or an
executable.AnOSSshellcommandmayinvokeascriptoranOSSexecutable.
The trigger action may be as simple as altering file attributes or as complex as language or SQL
compilation.Forinstance,atriggercanbeusedtocustomizeafilethathasbeenreplicatedtothe
destinationsystembychanginghard-codedsystemanddevicenames.
Reporting
It can be a daunting task to determine how frequently files should be synchronized. There is a
balance between communication efficiency and the need for current information on the target
system.
AutoSYNC can prepare reports showing the change activity of files on the production system. It
provides the information necessary for evaluating the amount of change that file sets undergo
before they are synchronized. This is done without actually moving any data. The reporting
3
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

functionallows system administrators toconfigureefficientsynchronizationschedules for disaster
recoveryorfordatadistribution.
AutoSYNC reports also compare source and destination file sets and indicate their status. They
are useful to check the results of scheduled or one-time synchronizations. The reports can also
aid in system migrations byprovidingad-hoc status on migrated volumes andsubvolumes during
themigrationprocess.
Synchronization Options
AutoSYNCprovidesmanyadditionalfunctionaloptionsthataffectfilesynchronization:
 Targetsystem files or subvolumes thatdonotexiston theproductionsystem
mayeitherbekeptormaybepurged.
 Newfilesbeingsynchronizedcancarrythenameoftheownerandthefilesecurity
parameters.
 SQLtablescanbesynchronizediftheirstructureshavebeenchangedviaDDL
commands.
 Temporaryfiles(typeZZ)canbeincludedorexcludedinthesynchronizationprocess.
 Auditedfilescanbeincludedorexcludedinthesynchronizationprocess.
 Certainfilescanbeexcludedfromthesynchronizationprocess.
 SynchronizationcantakeplaceoveraNonStopExpandlinkorviaTCP/IP.Whenusing
TCP/IP,theproductionandtargetsystemscanhavethesamename,whichisnot
possiblewhenusingEnscribe.
 Datacanbeoptionallycompressedby40%to50%ofitsoriginalsizetobemoreefficient
withbandwidthutilization.However,thisrequiresmoreCPUresources.
 Tocontrolitsoperationalfootprint,AutoSYNCcanrunataspecifiedpriorityorcanbe
throttledtoaspecifiedmaximumCPUusagepercentage.
AutoSYNC Architecture
AutoSYNC comprises three primary components – a command interpreter, a monitor process,
andthesynchronizationprocesses.
AutoSYNCCommandInterpreter
The AutoSYNC command interpreter is the user interface to AutoSYNC for configuration and
administration. It can also be used to perform other functions, such as one-time synchronization
of selected file sets. Its syntax is similar to the NonStop system’s SQLCI (SQL Command
Interface).
AutoSYNC Monitor
The AutoSYNC Monitor manages synchronization and is driven by the synchronization
schedules. It invokes the proper synchronization processes to execute the scheduled
synchronization tasks. It distributes the synchronization tasks in the primaryand backup systems
4
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

across all available systems to ensure scalability. Should there be any problem that prevents a
synchronization task from being completed, the Monitor reports this to the EMS event-reporting
system.
SynchronizationProcesses
Two programs are provided to execute the
synchronization tasks. The ASYSYNC program executes Monitor
a one-time synchronization command. ASYSYNCP
programs are invoked by the Monitor when it is time to
perform a scheduled synchronization. The Monitor starts schedule
enough ASYSYNCP processes to handle all of the active
synchronizations.
source
An ASYSYNC synchronization process is started on the files
target system for each ASYSYNCP process (by the
Monitor if TCP/IP is used for communication, or by the
ASYSYNCP process if Expand is being used). Using the
. . . .
synchronization schedule, the ASYSYNCP and
ASYSYNCP ASYSYNCP
ASYSYNC processes coordinate with each other to
determine the files that have changed bycomparing their
production
time stamps. The time-stamp comparison takes into
accounttimezones. backup
The names of files that have changed and are to be . . . .
ASYSYNC ASYSYNC
synchronized are returned to ASYSYNCP by ASYSYNC.
ASYSYNCP sends these files to ASYSYNC, which
createsorreplacesthefiles.
When a replacement is received, ASYSYNC saves the target
files
existing file to be replaced by renaming it before writing
the new file. If the new file is replaced successfully, the
saved file is purged. Should the synchronization task fail for any reason, the original file is
restoredfromtherenamedfile.
For OSS files, the replaced files are first written under different names. If the synchronization is
successful, the current file or directory is purged; and the new file or directory is renamed to the
targetname.
Fault Tolerance
Architecture
The AutoSYNC Monitor is a checkpointed, fault-tolerant process pair that survives any single
processor failure. It is responsible for correcting faults that affect the synchronization processes.
Should a process fail either due to a processor failure or to a process fault, the Monitor restarts
the failed process in a surviving processor. The Monitor makes three successive attempts to
restart the process and thereafter will try every 30 minutes. Upon recovery, the synchronization
taskcontinuesfromitspointofinterruption.
If any fault should interrupt synchronization, AutoSYNC will restore the previous version of any
filewhosecopywasinterrupted.Oncethefaulthasbeencorrected,filesynchronizationcontinues
whereitleftoff.
5
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Failover
AutoSYNC is often used in conjunction with database-replication products to provide business
continuity and disaster recovery. As do the replication products, AutoSYNC must also have
provisionstobringthedatabaseintoaconsistentstatefollowingafailovertothebackupsystem.
PlannedOutages
To take the primary system down for maintenance, all that is required is to gracefully terminate
AutoSYNC. First, the scheduled synchronization file sets are inspected to see if there are any
outstanding errors. If so, these errors should first be resolved. AutoSYNC is then suspended to
preventanyfurthersynchronization.
When the primarysystem is returned to service, the backup system is paused; and AutoSYNC is
used to resynchronize the primary system with the backup system’s file changes that occurred
while the primary system was down. Synchronization from the primary system to the backup
systemisthenrestarted.
UnplannedOutages
Should the primary system cease functioning and is no longer synchronizing files, the backup
system’ssynchronizingprocessesperformthenecessaryfile-recoveryactionsandthenterminate
themselves.Thebackupsystemcanbeputintoserviceatthispoint.
When the primarysystem is returned to service, AutoSYNC mustfirst be disabled on the primary
system to prevent old files from being replicated to the backup system. Recovery then proceeds
asdescribedaboveforplannedoutages.
Summary
AutoSYNC is an important tool for managing the configurations of a primary and backup system
in order to eliminate configuration drift. It provides a rich feature set that allows or excludes the
synchronization of NonStop Guardian and OSS files whether they are quiescent or active.
AutoSYNC is extensible via the use of triggers that can invoke scripts or programs following a
successfulsynchronizationtask.
AutoSYNC is built on the availability and scalability capabilities of the HP NonStop system. It
supports planned downtime for maintenance. It continues synchronization uninterrupted following
any single fault and recovers gracefully from disastrous faults. It uses all available resources in
thesystemtoprovidescalabilityandparallelexecutionofsynchronizingtasks.
6
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com