The Internet Hits a Capacity Limit
August2014
On the morning of Tuesday, August 12, 2014 (Eastern Standard Time), the Internet
slowed to a crawl. For some web sites, the speed was simply pathetic. Others became
inaccessible. Among the hardest hit was eBay. British users were unable to log onto
eBayformostoftheday,leadingmanytraderstodemandcompensationforlostsales.
The reason was not a datacenter failure or a network outage. Rather, a long-known limit of the Internet
hadbeenexceeded.Thenumberofroutesneededtolink themajorInternetdomainssurpassedadefault
limit in many of the routers that provide this function. These routers crashed or could not provide full
routingfunctions,bringingmajorportionsoftheInternettoahalt.
TheproblemwasintheBorderGatewayProtocolthatinterconnectsthemajorInternetdomains.
The Border Gateway Protocol
The Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) is how traffic finds its way across the globe. It maintains a current
view of network connectivity. Changes to the network in one part of the world propagate in seconds
throughouttheworld.
InternetAddressing
The delivery of messages over the Internet uses a three-level hierarchy - networks that comprise
subnetworks (subnets) that serve hosts. Each host has a unique IP (Internet Protocol) address that in IP
Version4(IPv4)isa32-bitaddresscomprisingfour8-bitoctets(anoctetisInternet-speakforbytes).IPv4
addressesareusuallyexpressedindotteddecimalnotation,suchas161.35.1.19.
In an IPv4 address, the two higher-order octets specify a network. The two lower-order octets specify a
subnet in the higher-order bits and a host in the lower-order bits. Often, the third octet is a subnet
address. The forth octet is the host address, but the number of bits used by each is determined by the
networkadministrator.
ThenetworkandsubnetworkaddressesarecalledtheIPaddressprefix.
The 32-bit IPv4 address space provides for four billion users. However, this address space is nearing
exhaustion. The new IPv6 address specification extends the address space to a 128-bit address – 16
octets–thatprovides1038addresses.IPv6isstillintheearlystagesofadoption.
1
©2014SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

AutonomousSystems
The Internet is more highly structured than simply a set of interconnected networks. It comprises a
network of interconnected autonomous systems (AS). An AS is a collection of networks controlled by a
single (or in some cases, more than one) entity, such as an ISP or a large corporation. More specifically,
itisacollectionofIProutingprefixesunderthecontrolofoneormorenetworkoperators.
EachASisassignedauniqueautonomoussystem number(ASN).Currently,theASN isa32-bitnumber.
However,thisaddressspaceisabouttobeexhausted;andtheASNisbeingextendedto64bits.
BGPRouters
Autonomous systems are interconnected by routers. They use the Border Gateway Protocol and are
called BGP routers. BGP routers are in every major Internet hub such as those run by ISPs, large
businesses,anduniversities.
Routers thatshareadirect connection(asinglehop) are BGPneighbors.Amessagepropagates through
the Internet by being relayed from one BGP router to its neighbor until it arrives at the destination
network.There, the destination network takes over and routes the message to its appropriate subnet and
host.
Itis theconnectivitybetweentheexternalBGProuters thatdescribes therelationships of thevarious ASs
andthereforethetopologyoftheInternet.
TomaintainaviewofthecurrentInternettopology,BGProutersexchangewiththeirneighborsmessages
that advertise new routes and that withdraw unfeasible routes. These changes quicklypropagate through
theInternetsothatallroutershaveareasonablycurrentviewoftheInternettopology.
TheBGPProtocol
The BGP protocol is the core routing protocol of the Internet. It provides the mechanism for BGP routers
tomaintainroutingtablesthatdesignatenetworkreachabilityamongtheASs.
A router’s routing table may contain several paths advertised by different neighbors to a particular IP
prefix.When choosing a route, the BGP protocol selects the path that routes a prefix most directly to the
destination address. For instance, assume that the message is to be delivered to IP address
161.45.210.10. The router finds one entry that will route to IP prefix 161.45 and another that will route to
161.45.210.Itwillchoosethelatterrouteasbeingthemoredirectroutetothedestination.
BGProuters advertisetheir routes byperiodicallysendingUpdatemessages toall of their neighbors.The
messages can be sent whenever a router experiences a routing table change, or they may be sent
periodically–suchaseverythirtyseconds.
An AS path is built by the routers as a new path propagates through the Internet via router
advertisements. When a router receives a new route, it adds the ASN of its autonomous system to the
path before it advertises the path to its neighbors. For instance, if a router in AS 22 receives a new path
thatis[345,2078],itwilladvertiseapathof[22,345,2078]toitsneighbors.Aneighborthenknowsthatit
can route a message to IP prefix 2078 by sending the message to autonomous system 22, from where
themessagewilltraverseAS345andAS2078beforereachingitsdestination.
If arouter ends up withmorethanoneroute to aspecific prefix,it will choose the routethat goes through
theleastnumber ofASs.Ifthereareties,ituses additionalconditions,suchas routeloading,tochoosea
route.
2
©2014SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

BGP Address Creep
The Internet limitation that was reached on August 12nd is that the BGP routing tables have grown too
large for many routers. Routes are stored in routers in memory called TCAM (Tertiary Content
AddressableMemory).Inearlyrouters,thedefaultTCAMallocationheld512K(524,288)BGPaddresses.
In the early days of the Internet, this was a number so large that no one thought it would ever be
exceeded(liketheIPv4addressexhaustion).
However, the Internet has grown at a tremendous rate. In May, 2014, Cisco issued an advisory that the
number of stored addresses in an average router was approaching the default limit. The typical
distributionofBGPaddressestodayrangesfrom497,000to511,000andvariesfromminutetominute.In
sixyears,thenumberofroutingtableentrieshasdoubledfrom256Kto512K.
It would take just a small percentage increase to overflow TCAM space in thousands of early routers still
inuse.Thatis whathappenedonAugust12.AmundanemaintenanceprocedurebyVerizongenerateda
burst of new addresses. The 512K limit was exceeded in BGP routers around the world, and these
routers came to their knees. They either crashed or lost routes. In any event, Internet traffic being
handled by major ISPs such as Verizon, AT&T, Sprint, Cogent, and Level 3 slowed to a crawl and
frustratedmillionsofInternetusers.
Verizon Delivers the Final Blow
Verizon wasn’t doing anything wrong. It was reconfiguring its network to free up the limited IPv4
addresses as itandmanyother companies have beendoing for a while.Basically, it was deaggreagating
its routes, fragmenting its network into smaller ones to make more effective use of IPv4 addresses. For
instance, if a subnet had a large number of end-point IPv4 addresses assigned to it but was using only a
few,breakingtheunusedend-pointsintosmallersubnetsfreedupmanyunusedaddresses.
Of course, deaggreagation adds BGP routes to incorporate the new subnets. In this particlular case,
Verizon released 15,000 new routes into the worldwide BGP network. This was enough to overload the
TCAMmemoriesofthousandsofrouters,andtheInternetslowedtoaninstantcrawl.
What Can Be Done?
According to Cisco, most routers have more than enough space to support larger routing tables; but the
default configuration must be abandoned and more memoryallocated to TCAM so that its route capacity
canbesignificantlyexpanded.
Cisco has released a list of affected products. They include Cisco 6500 switches, 7600 series routers,
andASR9000and1000SeriesAggregationServicesRouters
Another option has to do with IPv6 addressing. Many system managers have reduced their IPv4 address
capacity by reconfiguring memory to provide IPv6 address space at the expense of IPv4 address space.
However, the adoption of IPv6 addressing is proceeding very slowly. Therefore, some of the allocated
IPv6memorycanbereturnedtoIPv4use.
However,rebootingoldroutersisariskybusiness.Manysystemadministratorswillbereluctanttodoso.
Summary
TheBGPaddressing limitationhas beenknownfor alongtime,andthefactthattheInternet was nearing
this limithas also beenknown.However,system administrators havebeen slow totakecorrectiveaction.
Theproblemfinallycaughtupwiththem.
3
©2014SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Future slowdowns will only be avoided if the major ISPs, corporations, and universities expend the
resources necessary to upgrade old routers to significantly expand the BGP address capability of their
routers. If the BGP address space is doubling every six years, it will not be long before an address
capabilityof1,024Kwillnotbeenough.
Acknowledgements
Informationforthisarticlewastakenfromthefollowingsources:
Internethiccupstoday?You’renotalone.Here’swhy,ZDNet;August12,2014.
InternetTouchesHalfMillionroutes:OutagesPossibleNextWeek,Renesys;August13,2014.
Internetoutagesexpectedtoabateasroutersaremodified,rebooted,Computerworld;August13,2014.
Here’swhyyourInternetmighthavebeenslowonTuesday,WashingtonPost;August13,2014.
SlowInternetconnection?TheWebmighthaveabiggerproblem,TechTimes;August14,2014.
ThedaytheInternetbroke,Telegraph;August15,2014.
4
©2014SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com