Carbonite – The Online File Copy Utility
June 2017
In this issue’s “WannaCry Ransomware Global Attack,” I described how I would have
been protected if my system had been attacked by WannaCry. WannaCry is
ransomware middleware that propagates over networks and infects computers with an
unpatched vulnerability in the Microsoft Server Message Block Protocol.
When it finds such a system, it installs itself and encrypts all of the system’s files. It then posts a message
demanding a ransom of $300 in bitcoins, an untraceable cryptocurrency. If not paid in three days, the
ransom increases to $600. If the ransom is not paid in seven days, WannaCry says that it will delete the
files, though there are no known cases of files actually having been deleted.
I was protected from WannaCry in two ways. WannaCry infected mainly Windows 7 servers. I already had
upgraded to Windows 10. Security patches are automatically applied by Microsoft to Windows 10, and it
was protected from WannaCry infections.
The other protection was that my files were all backed up online. If WannaCry had infected my system
and had encrypted my files, all I would have had to do was to delete those files from my system and
reload the latest unencrypted files from my online backup.
The online copy service I use is Carbonite (www.carbonite.com).
Carbonite
Carbonite’s home page states its case succinctly:
“All it takes is a simple mistake or malicious ransomware virus and you could lose all the files on
your computer forever. But not if you have backup. Carbonite Computer Backup gives you peace
of mind knowing your files and photos are backed up safely to the cloud.”
In essence, Carbonite copies every file after it has been changed and stores it in its cloud.
1
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Carbonite provides unlimited cloud storage for your files, no matter how big or how many. Notice that
Carbonite has backed up over 30,000 of my files. Carbonite is always on and encrypts files at every step
to ensure security. You can view your files from any browser.
Most importantly, you can restore one or all files with just a few clicks.
More precisely, you can mark the files that you wish Carbonite to back up. File names are marked with a
colored dot that indicate whether the file has been selected for backup or not.
My Many Saves by Carbonite
Carbonite has saved me on many occasions. There have been times when I have accidentally deleted a
file and couldn’t restore it. At other times, I have corrupted a file by removing records inappropriately or by
modifying records with garbage.
In all of these cases, I was able to go to Carbonite and retrieve a good copy of the file. All I had to do was
to view the list of files stored online by Carbonite, click on it, and click “Restore.” Each time that has
happened, I have said “God bless Carbonite!”
Another feature of Carbonite lets you restore all files.
Older Versions
Carbonite will even store older versions of a file. As a file changes and is closed, Carbonite makes an
online copy of that file and stores it for later retrieval. However, it also saves some older versions of files.
When you request that a file be restored by clicking on it, Carbonite will present a list of the versions of
the files to which it has access. Simply click on the version that you want.
Carbonite will store older versions of files for 30 days. After that, it deletes them and they are no longer
recoverable. This feature almost got me into trouble a few years ago. I had purchased a new PC and
used Carbonite to load my files onto it. This worked great, and I carried on with my normal activities. At
the end of the month, it was time to add the latest version of the Availability Digest. To my chagrin, I found
that the Availability Digest files were not on my computer. I then realized that it had been a little over a
month since I had last accessed the Digest, so Carbonite had deleted my Digest files. Fortunately, they
were still on my old computer. I had to purchase a special box to allow me to transfer files between the
computers, but I was able to recover the Digest in that way.
2
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Customer Support
An important strength of Carbonite is its customer support service. There were occasions when I could
not find the version of the file that I wanted to download from Carbonite. In each case, a call to Carbonite
customer support quickly resolved the issue. Carbonite’s customer support personnel were quick to
understand my needs and seemed to magically find what I could not.
Summary
There have been many times when I would have been in deep hurt if I could not restore a file that I had
lost or corrupted. In each case, Carbonite saved the day for me.
Carbonite comes at a price of $59.99 per year. In my view and experience, this is an expense well worth
it.
There are other online file copy utilities available, such as IDrive, CrashPlan, and OpenDrive.1 You are
well-advised to choose one of these utilities and use it to provide security for your file system. Someday
you are likely to say, as I have done, “God bless xxx.”
1 The Best Online Backup Services of 2017, PC Magazine; May 5, 2017.
3
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman
|---|--|
| 0 |  |
| 1 |  |