Human Triple Whammy – NYSE, UA, WSJ
July2015
IT outage statistics show that about 40% of all system outages are caused by humans
and that approximately 70% include humans in one way or another. Human frailties
combined on Wednesday, July 8, 2015, to take down three major systems – the New York Stock
Exchange,UnitedAirlines,andtheWallStreetJournal.
These outages emphasize the point that redundancy should apply to humans as well as systems. Any
human action that represents a single point of failure ought to be undertaken by a team of at least two
people,oneproposingandperformingtheactionandanothercheckingandapprovingit.
New York Stock Exchange
In the early hours of Wednesday, July 8th, technicians at the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) were
busily upgrading the software to its gateways to support an upcoming change to the Session Initiation
Protocol (SIP). SIP is a communication protocol for controlling multimedia communication sessions,
typicallyInternetvoiceandvideoandinstantmessagingoverIP.
Duringfinaltesting,around 7:30AMlocaltime,problems werediscovered withtheupdate.Thegateways
were misconfigured for the new software release, causing communication issues between the customer
gateways providing access between the member brokers and the NYSE trading systems. The gateways
werereloadedwiththepropersoftwareversion,andthemarketsopenedontimeat9:30AM.
However, as the morning progressed, additional communication issues between the gateways and the
trading systems emerged. They became so severe that trading was shut down at 11:32 AM. In a
statement, an NYSE spokesperson explained, “It was determined that the NYSE and NYSE MKT
gateways were not loaded with the proper configuration compatible with the new release.” It was not
feasible to simply back out the upgrade and continue on with the original known configuration since this
mighthavecausedmanytradestobecanceled.
The termination of trading by one of the most important stock exchanges in the world is a disastrous
event. On an average day, the NYSE executes about four million trades worth about USD $50 billion. If
trading stops, customers cannot buy and sell shares; and brokerage firms lose millions of dollars in
commissions.
TheNYSEfacedaparticularlydifficultdeadlineinthatmutualfundsandotherinvestmentvehiclesneeda
closing price in order to evaluate their portfolios, a regulatory requirement. As the 4 PM closing bell
approached,thingsgrewtenser.
Finally, at 3:10 PM, the NYSE was able to get its trading systems operational, and trading continued at a
frenziedpaceuntilthe4PMclose.Thestockexchangehadbeendownfornearlyfourhours.
1
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

TheNYSEoutagewasdefinitelycausedbyahumanmanualconfigurationerror. Notonlywastheupdate
poorlyplanned,butthetestingoftheupgradewasinsufficient.
United Airlines
On the same day as the NYSE outage, July 8, 2015, United Airlines (UA) lost its reservation system for
90minutesinthemorning,U.S.time.Ithadtocancel59flights,andover800flightsweredelayedaround
the world. Passenger agents frantically tried manually to issue boarding passes and to rebook
passengersbutwereunabletomakeadentinthelinesofpassengersfranticallytryingtogetontoflights.
United blamed the outage on faulty network connectivitycaused by a router malfunction, which disrupted
itsreservationsystemanddegradednetworkconnectivityforvariousotherapplications.
United has experienced several IT problems since it first merged its computer systems with those of
Continental Airlines, which it acquired in 2010. Experts point out that this resulted in a massive
interconnected complex of patched computer systems that has proven difficult to manage. They claim
thatUnitedhasnotsupporteditsITinfrastructurewithsufficientstaffing,testing,andbackupsystems.
The United failure was caused by a failed router. Was this a human failure? It is apparent that United’s
interconnection network probably does not have pervasive redundancy or monitoring facilities to rapidly
detect and isolate problems. With effective redundancy, the failed router should have been replaced
automatically with a backup in seconds. Proper monitoring would have alerted IT staff immediately to the
problemsothattheycouldtakefurtherstepsifnecessary.
Why was there insufficient redundancy and monitoring? Probably financial considerations. Decisions by
humans.
Wall Street Journal
Addingtotheexcitementof themorningof July8th(andtothe delight,I’m sure,ofits competitors),athird
major company faced problems. Just before noon in New York City, the web site of the Wall Street
Journal (WSJ) started responding to user requests with 504 (timeout) errors. The problem became so
severethatthewebsitewaseffectivelynonresponsivetomostrequests.
The problem happened just minutes after the NYSE shut down at 11:32 AM, leading most people to
conclude that the web site succumbed to an overwhelming request for explanations as to why the NYSE
hadstoppedtrading.
This fault was caused by a web site implemented with insufficient capacity and without the capability to
burstexcessivetraffictoacloud.Whosefaultwasthis?Management.Again,thefingerforthisfailurecan
bepointedtothehuman.
Summary
Atfirst,manywereconvincedthatthesefailures were theresultof amassivecoordinated hackingattack.
Justthepreviousevening,theAnonymoushackinggrouphadtweeted“Wonderiftomorrowisgoingtobe
bad for Wall Street … we can only hope.” However, the detailed descriptions of the faults put this
speculationtorest.
Human beings have their fingers into most causes of IT failures, whether it be an overt action like typing
the wrong command or a management decision that leaves IT systems vulnerable.When it comes to the
useofITstaff,thereareseveralthingstoconsider:
 Ifthereis anoperationthatmustbeaccomplishedmanuallyandthatwillcauseasystem failureif
performed erroneously, use two people, one to propose and execute the operation and the other
2
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

to approve and monitor it. Operations such as this range from entering a sensitive command to
pullingafailedboardratherthantheoperationalboard.
 Failover to a backup system is one of the most difficult operations to perform successfully.
Failover faults all too often prevent the recovery of a failed primary system. Many failover faults
arecausedbyhumanerrors.Failoverproceduresshouldbehighlyautomated,andanyremaining
manual procedures should be fully documented. The failover process should be practiced
periodicallytomakesurethattheproceduresarecorrectandthatthepeopleareproperlytrained.
 All software changes should be reviewed by one or more qualified people. This is another
exampleofhumanredundancy.Asoftwareerrorwouldhavetobemissedbytwoormorepeople.
 Any upgrade to a system must have associated with it a planned backout procedure to return to
theknownworkingconfiguration.Upgradesareimplementedbypeople.Peoplemakeerrors.
 Management must ensure that the resources required for adequate staffing, testing, and
redundancyconfigurationsaremadeavailabletotheITdepartment.
Acknowledgements
Materialforthisarticlewastakenfromthefollowingresources:
United Airlines, NYSE Outages Reveal Poor Redundancy Architecture, Insufficient Testing, CRN; July 8,
2015.
UnitedAirlinesblamesgroundingofhundredsofflightsoncomputerglitch,LATimes;July8,2015.
Oops,504!,Politico;July8,2015.
NYSEoutagehighlightsneedforITautomation,SearchDataCenter;July9,2015.
3
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com