is called “uptime.” Maintaining uptime can be a challenge especially for many of these top high-traffic
websites. It requires significant computing power to process all the requests and data being
transferred from across the globe. Here are some of the things that help huge websites remain up.
https://t.co/cOXUZw37lb
Cameroon’s Internet outage is damaging the country’s economy
On January 17, around 20 percent of the people in Cameroon found their Internet blocked. Now
March, the connections remain down; and the outage is generally believed to be politically
motivated. But the country must face up to a cold, hard fact: if it’s blocking its Internet, it’s damaging
its own economy.
https://t.co/Y9lro2VUHg
Weather Service suffers ‘catastrophic’ outage, stops sending forecasts, warnings
On a day when a blizzard was pasting Maine and Northern California faced a dire flooding threat,
several of the National Weather Service's primary systems for sending out alerts to the public failed
for nearly three hours. Two core routers for transmitting information from the Weather Service offices
out to satellites, which beam the information back to public service providers, stopped working. Both
the primary and the backup failed.
http://bit.ly/2o0N1iT
6
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Extreme Solar Blackouts May Cost U.S. More Than $40 Billion Daily
The daily U.S. economic cost from solar storm-induced electricity blackouts could be in the tens of
billions of dollars, with more than half the loss from indirect costs outside the blackout zone,
according to a new study published in a science journal. Previous studies have focused on direct
economic costs within the blackout zone, failing to take into account indirect domestic and
international supply chain loss from extreme space weather, according to this latest report.
https://t.co/n0zwe7PR9E
Earth’s magnetic field ‘could be about to flip - and it's now overdue’
Scientists have said that the Earth’s magnetic poles could flip for the first time in 786,000 years –
and that the event is now ‘overdue’. Compasses would point south – and the Earth’s power grid
could collapse. But before you head for the doomsday bunkers, it’s probably not going to happen
right away – with scientists predicting a ‘flip’ sometime in the next 2,000 years.
https://t.co/SHhH3h9bHy
Brussels Grid Collapses – Solar Batteries No Help
Large parts of Brussels were without power the evening of 9 February after the City Grid ceased to
function at about 10.45 pm local time. But buildings with solar panels on rooftops were not able to
maintain their own power supply because the panels are all feeding into to the grid. Even solar
panels with battery backup were unable to maintain a supply because EU regulations require a
cutoff of the battery supply in the event of a grid outage.
https://t.co/yl5jFQR1S3
Blackouts after DBIS goes down
Large parts of Guyana were plunged into several hours of blackout in mid-February after the
Demerara Berbice Interconnected System (DBIS) went down. A spokesperson from the
Guyana Power and Light confirmed that the DBIS went down around 8 pm and resulted in a
total power outage.
https://t.co/rlVEEVY4Wu
Booted up in 1993, this server still runs -- but not for much longer
In 1993, U.S. President Bill Clinton was in the first year of his presidency, Windows NT 3.1 and
Jurassic Park were both released, the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) was signed,
and Phil Hogan, an IT application architect, booted up a brand-new Stratus Technologies fault
tolerant server. A lot has changed in 24 years, but one thing hasn't: The Stratus server is still in
operation and Hogan -- who works at steel products maker Great Lakes Works EGL in Dearborn
Mich. -- continues to keep it that way.
https://t.co/xNv3KrcAK2
7
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

From http://SHADOWBASESOFTWARE.COM - "Improving Availability via Staggered
Systems Part 1: MTTF – Mean Time to Failure"
The availability of a pair of redundant systems can be significantly enhanced via a simple expedient.
Simply stagger their starting times. In this way, the time corresponding to the peak probability of
failure of one system will not align with the time corresponding to the peak probability of failure of the
other system. When one system is likely to fail, the other system is likely to survive. In this pair of
papers, we delve into the theory behind this concept. In the first part of this series, we point out a
fallacy in classic availability theory.
http://bit.ly/2kPbRDE
Fair Warning! There's Math Ahead. "The Fallacy of Classic Availability Theory" by the
Digest's Dr. Bill Highleyman
Classic availability theory is flawed in that the expected time to a system failure does not change
with time. Clearly, as time goes on, the expected time to system failure should shorten. This flaw is
corrected with the concept of Mean Time to Failure (MTTF). MTTF can be used to determine the
impact on the availability of various redundant system configurations.
https://t.co/NVaKp0I5DJ
How environmentally-conscious data centres are increasing network uptime
As the need for new data centres rises in lockstep with concerns for their environmental impacts,
engineers at a growing roster of companies are stretching their imaginations to entertain out-of-the-
box strategies for saving power and keeping their data centres cool. As a result, new facilities are
being built in increasingly exotic locales and with progressively innovative designs. At the same time,
companies recognise the importance of making sure that these non-traditional data centres – which,
by their nature, are often located at a distance from operational centres – remain remotely and
reliably accessible in order to ensure uninterrupted monitoring, management, and ultimately uptime.
https://t.co/UdITQtHIJL
Building High Availability for Industrial and Embedded Systems
High Availability (HA) is not just for the data center. While the principles of achieving extreme uptime
have been honed by enterprise IT teams, it’s just as important for industrial and embedded
applications, which are often deployed in mission-critical environments. By understanding and
leveraging HA principles perfected in the enterprise environment, industrial and embedded servers
can be made more robust, reliable, and resilient.
https://t.co/dvetexr6qC
ATO admits it's baffled by outages but upgrades to latest HPE hardware anyway
The Australian Taxation Office has admitted it still does not know why its online systems crashed
again in early late January/early February, causing a four-day systems outage that led accountants
to call for compensation. Speaking to The Australian Financial Review after most of the systems
were back up online, ATO chief information officer Ramez Katf said it would jettison the Hewlett-
Packard Enterprise data storage system that first failed last December and would expand the scope
of an ongoing review into the first crash to include the latest one.
https://t.co/bLoCaNwwWi
8
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Blackout leaves at least 40,000 people without power in South Australia
South Australia is currently experiencing some of the highest demands for electricity ever recorded
as the state swelters through a heatwave. In a process called load-shedding, the Australian Energy
Market Operator (AEMO) deliberately is shutting off power to certain suburbs temporarily in order to
prevent a more severe and prolonged outage.
`
https://t.co/6ihmND3D0x
Trident launch failure could have been due to faulty IT system
The nuclear-warhead carrying Trident missile that veered towards the US instead of its intended
target after launch could have suffered from an IT systems glitch. The missile was launched from
HMS Vengeance, which had just completed an IT systems upgrade. It is highly possible that an error
or misconfiguration of this new equipment or a bug in the new IT systems was to blame for the
failure. The missile in question was unarmed, but the consequences of an armed nuclear missile
veering off course are potentially disastrous.
https://t.co/LUkDWMjAjz
For better or worse, the UK’s nuclear submarines still run Windows XP
Britain owns four missile submarines: The HMS Vanguard, the Victorious, the Vigilant, and the
Vengeance. They patrol the oceans to protect its citizens against a surprise nuclear attack. And
while it is reassuring to know what the country does in order to protect the land, the scary part is that
each submarine runs Microsoft’s first commercial NT-based operating system, installed since 2008.
https://t.co/kyhWl2eDc8
Fatigue, Spam, and Lack of Backups Take Down http://GitLab.com
The production data loss and hours of downtime at GitLab is an unfortunate and fascinating story
about how little things, from spam to engineer fatigue, can coalesce into something more
catastrophic. Anecdotes started to trickle in on January 31st, but a single tweet confirmed that
something was amiss at GitLab.com: “We accidentally deleted production data and might have to
restore from backup.”
https://t.co/BKL86qcvlm
Businesses experiencing an epidemic of certificate-related outages
Four in five businesses suffered certificate-related outages last year. Almost two-thirds (64%) said
their organisations could not respond to a certificate-related security event in six hours or less. The
leading cause of outages of this kind is that companies are simply missing the expiry date on their
certificates and have no processes in place to automate renewal.
https://t.co/xmDbFDhmP6
Surviving a cloud-based disaster recovery plan
Traditional corporate disaster-recovery programs consider primarily on-premise problems such as
power outages, server failures, and data loss. These days, disaster-recovery plans ought to (but
frequently do not) include situations where you can't rely on any kind of connectivity to the Internet.
Even when the company has a plan to address each element that can go wrong, organizations
rarely test those scenarios to make sure the backup actually works.
https://t.co/5WutYGlnGB
9
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

How do you build Africa’s newest tech ecosystem when the government shuts the
Internet down?
Since mid-January, Cameroon’s northwest and southwest regions have had no Internet—affecting
businesses like Internet cafes, microfinance institutions, and money transfer agencies. The Internet
shutdown has also had an adverse effect on the budding tech industry in the country. Known as the
Silicon Mountain, a play on Silicon Valley and Mount Cameroon, most of these start-ups are located
in Buea, a small town that has been described as the country’s home of innovation and Africa’s next
tech hub.
https://t.co/UNWB7IDKJj
Telstra suffers major outage due to exchange fire
Australia’s largest telecoms company, Telstra, recently suffered a major outage throughout its
network after a core exchange near Sydney caught fire. The issues affected fixed line and mobile
services across New South Wales, Victoria, Queensland, South Australia and Western Australia.
The incident disrupted nearly 30 percent of overall Telstra traffic, causing delays for flights and train
journeys. Some government offices and schools had to be closed, and digital businesses lost their
revenue. A corruption of the internal IT systems also meant that some of the text messages sent by
Telstra customers were delivered to wrong recipients.
https://t.co/kHHYuOTWpx
"The Best Disaster Recovery Advice for Failover and Failback Success"
Your organization’s disaster recovery plan (DRP) is an essential component of its business
continuity plan (BCP) and must include not only the physical setups for data replication and
protection at a secondary location, but also effective failover and fallback strategies to ensure you
will be able to execute your DRP successfully.
https://t.co/rdf8PKeGQo
Tesla’s New Powerpack Grid in LA Could Be the Future of Power Plants
Tesla recently installed a Powerpack utility grid that has enough energy to power 2,500 homes all
day and reduce the Los Angeles area’s reliance on fossil fuels at the same time. Tesla has posted a
video on Twitter of a grid it has installed at Southern California Edison’s substation in the Los
Angeles Basin. Installing all of these sleek white Powerpacks took 94 days.
https://t.co/V9LdpvYCJC
Innovative Direct-Current Microgrids to Solve India’s Power Woes
In the industrialized world, the power grid is so reliable that we take it for granted. But in India, where
blackouts are a sad fact of daily life, being connected to the grid is no guarantee of reliable
electricity. Roughly a quarter of a billion Indians, or one-fifth of the population, live without access to
any electricity at all. In recent years, the Indian government has invested heavily in electricity
generation (including solar- and wind-power plants), state-of-the-art high voltage transmission lines,
and a multitude of household electrification projects. And yet these efforts have made only a modest
dent in the problem.
https://t.co/ScDczLdFUr
10
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Atomic clocks failure: ISRO decides to replace IRNSS-1A with backup navigation
satellite
Three atomic clocks on board ISRO's IRNSS-1A satellite have failed. The Indian Space Research
Organisation will be launching the backup navigation satellite this year, and it will replace the
IRNSS-1A.
https://t.co/FuIwHVgUky
GitLab suffers major backup failure after data deletion incident
Khosla Ventures and Y Combinator-backed open source Git repository GitLab went offline in early
February after suffering what appears to be a major backup restoration failure after accidentally
deleting production data.
https://t.co/Nje4OfDJ48
Delta Outage Spotlights Technology Risks
Delta’s computer outage on 29 January was over by midnight, but its effects extended well into the
week. Such outages can be costly. Jim Corridore, an analyst at CFRA Research, says that Delta’s
computer outage puts a “spotlight on risks of airline technology infrastructure, much of which is old
and patched with differing systems.” He said that airlines build new programming over old software,
especially after a merger, when computer languages may differ. Programmers’ assumptions about
how software will work are sometimes wrong. While large companies such as Delta would have
fewer outages with more testing of their systems, this is an expensive proposition.
https://t.co/f7HInsIqDC
11
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

