Facebook Suffers Self-Inflicted Outage
March2015
On Tuesday morning, January 27, 2015, at 6:10 AM GMT (10:10 PM PST), Facebook
went down for almost an hour. The outage also took down its photo-sharing site,
Instagram. The outage affected 1.35 billion Facebook users and 300 million Instagram
usersworldwide.
The Facebook Outage
TheFacebook outagewas effectivelyglobal,affectingusersintheU.S.,theU.K.,Europe,Asia,Australia,
andNewZealand.Thiswasitsworstoutageinfouryears.
During the outage, some visitors were greeted with the message “Sorry, something went wrong.” For
others,theFacebook pagesimplywouldnotload.Duringthehour-longoutage,humansaroundtheglobe
wereforcedtointeractwitheachotherinperson.
The Facebook outage affected not only Facebook and Instagram but also other web sites that are linked
to Facebook’s sign-on system. Impacted web sites included the dating site Tinder and the chat sites
HipchatandAIM(AOL’sinstantmessagingsite).
Though Facebook posted on its developer website that its outage lasted an hour, many users reported
thatthesitewasloadingslowlyornotofferingfullfunctionality.
The Twitter-verse sprang into action with complaints about Facebook’s outages. The hashtag
#facebookdowntoppedthetrendontheTwittersite.
Initially, there was speculation that Facebook had been taken down by a DDoS attack.The hacker group
Lizard Squad tweeted “Facebook, Instagram, Tinder, AIM, Hipchat #offline #LizardSquad.” The Lizard
Squad is believed to have been behind the outages of Sony’s PlayStation Network and Microsoft’s Xbox
overChristmas.
However, Facebook quickly announced that the outage was not due to hackers. It was due to its own
maintenanceerrors.Facebookissuedastatementsayingthat:
“Thiswasnottheresultofathird-partyattackbutinsteadoccurredafterweintroducedachange
thataffectedourconfigurationsystems.”
Déjà Vue?
The fact that Facebook attributed this outage to “a change that affected our configuration systems” is
interestingly reminiscent of one of its most serious outages. This was an outage on Sepember 23, 2010
1
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

that lasted for two-and-a-half hours. The outage was caused by an automated system that verified
configurationvalues.
According to a Facebook blog posting, Facebook attributed the outage to an unfortunate handling of a
new error condition. The intent of the automated system was to check for configuration values that were
invalid in the cache and replace them with updated values from the persistent store. This worked well for
cacheerrors,butdidnotcatcherrorsinthepersistentstore.
On the day of the outage, Facebook administrators made an invalid change to a persistent copy of a
configuration value in the persistent store. Every client saw the invalid value and attempted to fix it.
However, the fix involved making a query to a database cluster, and the database cluster was quickly
overwhelmedbythousandsofqueriespersecond.
To make matters worse, every time a client got an “invalid configuration error” from the database, it
deleted the corresponding cache key. Consequently, even after the original problem had been fixed, the
stream of queries continued. As long as the databases failed to service some requests, even more
requests were being made. The system had entered a feedback loop that did not allow the databases to
recover.
The fix turned out to be simple. The Facebook web site was simply taken down and rebooted. Once the
databases had recovered and the root cause had been fixed, people were slowly allowed to come back
ontothesite.
Other Facebook Outages
Facebookhashaditsshareofoutagesovertheyears:
 January23,2015:A50minuteoutage,thesubjectofthisarticle.
 August 1, 2014: An outage due to a server error that affected sites that used its login system, lasting
onehourandfortyminutes.
 June19,2014:Athirty-oneminutesoutageduetoanundisclosedproblem.
 October 13, 2013: An problem during network maintenance that lasted more than four hours and
preventedusersfrompostingupdates,causingproblemsforover3,500websites.
 September23,2010:Atwo-and-a-halfhourdisruptiondescribedabove.
 July31,2007:Sitepurposelytakenofflinetofixabug.
The Huffington Post has published a more inclusive list of Facebook outages and selected tweets
complainingofoutages,manyofthemquiteshortintime.1
Summary
Accordingtoonesecurityexpert,
“Perhaps one of the most extraordinary aspects of this 40-minute outage is the panic it appeared to
have caused amongst its users. Other social media were almost immediately full of users openly
wondering how they would manage without access to Facebook. It is almost as if social media has
become a part of our critical infrastructure, but hopefully people will realize that it is just a social
network.”
1FacebookDown,HuffingtonPost:http://www.huffingtonpost.com/news/facebook-down/.
2
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

It is amazing how much social media has taken over our lives. However, as important as Facebook may
be to the well-being of many of us, it is only fair to point out that, according to the downtime statistics,
Facebook has achieved an availability in excess of four 9s for most of the years of its existence. This is
anadmirablerecordforamajorwebsite.
Acknowledgements
Informationforthisarticlewastakenfromthefollowingsources:
Facebookoutage:Itwasus,nothackers,saysFacebook,ZDNet;January27,2015.
Facebook,Instagrambrieflygodown:Twitterfreaksout,CNN;January27,2015.
Facebookgoesdown,deniescyberattack,CNBC;January27,2015.
FacebookSuffersSelf-InflictedOutage,NPR;January27,2015.
IsFacebookdown?Ahistoryofoutages,TheGuardian;January27,2015.
Facebook, Instagram Suffer Widespread Outage Overnight; Tinder, Hipchat also go down, Huffington
Post;January27,2015.
FacebookDown,HuffingtonPost;undated.
MoreDetailsonToday’sOutage,Facebook;September23,2010.
3
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com