five9s 5minutes
six9s 30seconds
Downtimeand9s
Table1
4 W. H. Highleyman, P. J. Holenstein, B. D. Holenstein, Chapter 1, The 9s Game, Breaking the Availability Barrier:
SurvivableSystemsforEnterpriseComputing,AuthorHouse;2004.
4
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Keep in mind that these are averages. Four 9s, for instance, does not mean that you will
experience a one-hour outage each year. You will achieve four 9s if you have a four-hour outage
everyfouryearsoraone-dayoutageeverytwenty-fouryears.Canyourbusinesssurvivethat?
It is up to you to decide the criticality of your various applications and the downtime that you are
willing to tolerate for each.5 In this series, we concentrate on techniques for achieving five 9s of
availabilityandbeyond.
DisasterRecoveryversusDisasterTolerance
Disaster recovery is the ability to bring up backup facilities to carry on the business following the
loss of data processing. This may require recovering the database, loading applications, testing
the backup site before IT operations can resume, and finallyswitching the network and the users
overtotherecoveredsystem.Disasterrecoverytypicallytakeshoursordays.
Disaster tolerance, on the other hand, is the ability to continue operations in the event of a
disaster without users noticing that there has been an outage or at least without denying
application services to the users for very long. How long is “very long”? This depends upon your
applicationrequirements,asdiscussedbelow.
Inthisseries,wefocusonachievingdisastertoleranceforyourcriticalapplications.
HighAvailability
Typicallyinthe industrytoday, highavailability is seen as anavailabilityof five9s or greater (less
than five minutes of downtime per year). Again, keep in mind that this is an average. It is
achievedifasystemfailsfiveminutesonceperyearoronehoureverytwelveyears.
ContinuousAvailability
If an application requires an availability of six 9s or beyond, the measure of 9s is no longer very
helpful. Measuring seconds of downtime per year is simply not practical. Rather, what is
important is failover time and failover reliability. If the system can fail over from a hardware or
softwarefaultor evenadata-center disaster insubseconds or seconds,andif itisknownthatthe
failover will succeed, then true disaster tolerance as defined above is achieved. This is
continuousavailability.
RecoveryTimeObjective(RTO)
The failover time that you can tolerate for an application is defined as the Recovery Time
Objective,orRTO.6Wewillusethismeasureextensivelyinthefollowingdiscussions.
Data-replication technology is a key enabler to achieve either high availability or continuous
availabilitybyminimizingRTO.
Data Availability and the Recovery Point Objective (RPO)
The previous section dealt with system availability. But an available system with full processing
capacity is of no use if it does not have correct and current data to process. In some cases,
accesstoacompletehistoryofactivityisalsorequired.
5Thisisobviouslyabusinessdecision,astheamountofavailabilitythatthebusinessrequireswilldrivethearchitectures
toconsiderandthereforethecostandcomplexityofthesystemtobeimplemented.
6 W. H. Highleyman, P. J. Holenstein, B. D. Holenstein, Chapter 6, RPO and RTO, Breaking the Availability Barrier:
SurvivableSystemsforEnterpriseComputing,AuthorHouse;2004.
5
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

There are many reasons why important data may be lost, from system failures to data-center
failures. Data is typically protected by backing it up. Should there be a failure of some sort, the
data can be restored from its last backup. Any data updates that have occurred since the last
backuparelost.
Each application has a different importance to the company, and the importance of the
application-generated data will vary. In some cases, the data has little value. In other cases, the
loss of a few minutes of data, while painful, may be acceptable. For mission-critical applications,
zerodatalossmayberequired.
HighDataLoss
Perhaps thedataassociatedwithanapplicationhas littlevalue.Hours of datacan belostwithno
serious impact to the company. Data used only for statistical analysis, such as counting web
clicks,isanexampleofthistypeofdata.
LittleDataLoss
For many applications, data is very important to the company. Though its loss will not imperil the
company, the cost of losing this data might be very high. In some cases, it might be possible to
recreatethelostdataviamanualdataentryoncethesystem isrestoredsolongasnotmorethan
a few minutes of data are lost. Examples of this kind of data include ATM transactions and cell-
phonecalldatarecords.
NoDataLoss
Someapplications representthecore of thebusiness, andnoloss is tolerable.Anylostdatamay
be unrecoverable, and such loss could seriously impact the fundamental operations of the
business.Anexampleis thetradingdatafor astock exchange.If tradedatais lostandcannotbe
reconstructed,thereis nobasis for establishingthepriceof thevarious instruments tradedonthe
exchange. In these cases, data loss cannot be tolerated. Other examples are electronic funds
transfers(EFT)andhealth-carerecords.
RecoveryPointObjective(RPO)
The amount of lost data that an application can tolerate is its Recovery Point Objective, or RPO.7
The data-replication techniques that this series discusses can reduce RPO to seconds and even
tozeroifrequired.
Specifying Availability – RTO and RPO
In our discussions above, we introduced the concepts of RTO (Recovery Time Objective) and
RPO (Recovery Point Objective) for an application. RTO is expressed as time and is the amount
of time that the company can afford to operate without the data-processing services of an
application. RPO is also expressed as time and is the amount of application data loss that the
companycantolerateduetoanunplannedoutage.8
7 W. H. Highleyman, P. J. Holenstein, B. D. Holenstein, Chapter 6, RPO and RTO, Breaking the Availability Barrier:
SurvivableSystemsforEnterpriseComputing,AuthorHouse;2004.
8Expressingdataloss interms oftimemayseem counterintuitive.Inreal systems,however, it is apracticalmethodto
use. It is the timefrom the generation of datatothetimethat it is safe-stored onthetarget system that is really being
measured. This can be converted directly to lost data by using the transaction rate. If the RPO is one minute, and if
transactionsarebeinggeneratedatarateof1,000transactionsperminute,thisisequivalenttospecifyingthatnomore
than1,000transactionscanbelost.
6
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

lastsaved system system
database failure recovery
dataloss systemdown
time
RPO RTO
a)DefinitionofRPO,RTO
lastsaved system system
database failure recovery
time
RPO RTO
b)ImprovingRPO,RTO
Figure1:TheRPO/RTORelationship
In Figure 1a, we show the relationship between RPO and RTO. Backups might be made by
quiescingthesystem andbydumpingthedatabaseto magnetic tape,byexecutingonlinedumps
todisk,byusingaudit-trailrollups,orbyemployinganumberofmoreimmediatetechniquessuch
as data replication, as discussed later. Should the primary system fail, the last database backup
can be loaded onto a backup system; and processing can continue. The amount of application
datalostis thatnewdatageneratedfrom thetimeofthelastdatabasebackuporreplicationpoint
tothetimeoffailure.Thisisthemaximumamountofdatathatcanbelostandyetstillachievethe
desiredRPOgoal.
Techniques for moving the left vertical bar to the right, closer and closer to the point of system
failure, thereby reducing or eliminating data loss, as shown in Figure 1b, is one focus of this
series.
Following a failure, steps are taken to recover processing. This may entail repairing the downed
system, or it mayrequire switching over to a backup system. The time from the point of failure to
the time of recovery must be less than the RTO specified for the application. Techniques for
moving the recovery point (the right vertical bar) closer to the point of system failure, thereby
minimizingsystemdowntime,asshowninFigure1b,isalsoafocusofthisseries.
RPO specifies the maximum amount of time between a backup of the database (full or
incremental)andthepoint offailure,assumingthatthedatabaseisactive.For instance,ifRPO is
four hours, database backups (full or incremental) must be taken morefrequently than everyfour
hours. If RPO is five seconds, data replication is required; and the latency of the data-replication
enginecannotexceedfiveseconds.
RTO specifies the maximum amount of time from the point of failure to system recovery. Having
to repair a system in order to restore processing services can result in RTOs measured in hours
orevendays.Failingovertoabackupsystem canreduceRTOtotimesrangingfromhoursdown
to minutes. And as we shall see, failing over to an operating backup system can lessen this time
tosecondsorsubseconds.
Data-replicationtechnologyallowssystemstobeconfiguredtomeetanyrequiredRPOandRTO,
as we will discuss later. In the extreme, zero RPOs and RTOs measured in subseconds can be
achieved.Butfirst,weexplainhowdatareplicationworks.
7
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Summary
A system may be down either because it is undergoing planned maintenance or because it has
sufferedanunplannedoutage.Inmanysystems,plannedoutagesmustbeeliminated.
With respect to unplanned outages, the availability of a system can be characterized by several
parameters, including availability, recovery time (RTO), and lost data (RPO). Systems can
provide high availability (minutes of downtime per outage) or continuous availability (seconds of
downtime per outage). Distributed systems can provide disaster recovery, in which operations
can be restored following a disaster that destroys the production system, though this may take
days or weeks. Extended distributed systems can provide disaster tolerance such that disasters
havenoeffectontheendusers.
The fundamental technology used to provide high- and continuous availability is data replication.
InPart2ofthisseries,welookatthevariousdata-replicationtechniquesavailabletoday.
8
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com
