Targeted – The Story of a Pathological Work Place Bully
RobertPearsonRichardson
June2015
Bullying doesn’t just happen on the school ground. It takes place in the workplace as
well. In his recently published book Targeted: The Story of a Pathological Serial Work
Place Bully (June 28, 2015), Robert Richardson relates his frightening story of being bullied throughout
his later professional career by a persistent and aggressive bully whom he names “Morris.” Morris
eventually ruined Richardson’s career at three different companies. Richardson is very open about his
experiences,eventothepointofidentifyingthecompaniesatwhichthebullyingtookplace.
In his book however, the Company names and the names of all those involved, including the Bully, have
beenchangedto“protectboththeinnocentandtheguilty.”
Infact,inhisacknowledgements,hestates(tongue-in-cheek):
“… I really want … to give a very special thanks to the Management of Company_1 who allowed
Morriswithhisbullyingtofesterandcontinueonhisreignofterroronme.…
Also, special thanks goes to the Management at Company_2 who had allowed Morris to go on his
merrywayoftargetingme,defamingmycharacter,andgettingmefiredatCompany_2.…
And last but not least, to the Management at Company_3, who acted like sheep, listened to and
believing the lies and BS from that horrible bully, never questioning me, and taking the easyroute by
lettingmegothreeshortweeksaftermyBosshadoriginallytoldmeIwasdoingagreatjob.
WithoutallthoseManagementdecisions,thisbookwouldneverhavebeenwritten.”
Company_1
Richardson’s tale of terror begins with his employment at Company_1 where he
worked as a Tandem developer starting in 1997. It was there, after four years of
successful development, that he met Morris and became good friends with him,
eventothepointofopeninguptohimaboutpersonalproblemshewashaving.
Then suddenly, Morris began accusing him of talking about him behind his back,
something Richardson vehemently denied. The accusations continued, and the
relationship with Morris grew worse. Morris started defaming Richardson among
hisassociates.Hesetupget-togethersandspecificallydidnotinviteRichardson.
He continually stared at Richardson with dirty looks and made loud noises that
were meant to imply that Richardson was physically threatening him. He
complainedtoHRaboutRichardson.
1
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Richardson and other team members who were aware of what was going on pleaded with the group
supervisortoreigninMorris.However,noactionwasevertaken.
Finally, Richardson was informed that his job was being outsourced to India; and he was let go with a
termination package. His final day was in 2007, ten years after he had initially been employed by
Company_1.Ifnothingelse,Richardsonfeltagreatdealofreliefthathe wasfinallygettingawayfrom the
bully.Littledidheknowthatthatthisreprievewouldnotlastforlong.
Tandem Consulting
HP
Richardson next began working as a Tandem consultant. After several short assignments, he obtained a
long-term consulting position at Hewlett Packard in Little Rock, Arkansas. After eight months, he became
anemployee.Four yearslater,in2012,RichardsonfellvictimtoalargeHPlayoff.
Company_2
Richardson landed a new assignment at Company_2. On his second day, to his horror, he saw Morris in
the parking lot. During the next three months that Richardson was at Company_2, he saw Morris many
times. Each time, Morris signed in at the main desk and was under continual escort. It turned out that
Morris was interviewing at the company, and he took every opportunity to defame Richardson to
management.Richardsononceheardhimsay,“Ican’tbelieveyoureallyhiredthisguy.”
Richardson was ultimately let go by Company_2. At the beginning of his last week, he saw Morris being
escorted out of the building, loudly complaining that “What do you mean? You told me I had a job.” The
manager responded, “We thank you for alerting us to him. … If you weren’t here, he’d still be here. … I
don’t want you anywhere near the other members of my team. You might just be the worst bully I have
everseen.”
To add insult to injury, the consulting firm through which Richardson had been working terminated its
relationshipwithhim.
Company_3
Richardson finished out his consulting career at Company_2. Company_3 was a neighboring company
whichiswhereMorrisappearedtobeinterviewingandvisitingafriend.HislastjobwaswithCompany_2.
To seal his fate at Company_2, Morris actually did an interview with Company_2. When he passed Mr.
Richardson while he was heading for a meeting, he stopped and publicly defamed his character loud
enoughforeveryoneinthehalltohear.
Except for his mention of Company_3 in his Acknowledgement and his note that this was his last job, he
gives no further information about his bullying at Company_3. However, his self-admission that he had
substantially lost his self-esteem and self-confidence through years of bullying may have contributed to
hisdemiseatthiscompany.
Richardson’s Final Trials
Richardson has been diagnosed with PTSD (Post-Traumatic Stress Syndrome) as a result of the stress
he has endured for over a decade (yes, you don’t have to be in combat to get PTSD). His house is in
foreclosure,andheisfacingpotentialbankruptcy.
He has turned to religion to try to learn how to forgive Morris, but so far he has met with little success in
thisendeavor.
2
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

However, he decided on trying to help others who are finding themselves facing bullies. This was the
purpose in writing his book. At the end of the book, he lists many resources ranging from other books to
web sites that give good advice on how to handle bullying. He has even started his own organization,
BullyProofAssistant.
My Personal Experience
I related very closely to Richardson’s tale because I also experienced extreme workplace bullying. My
company, The Sombers Group, had a large contract for software development at Dow Jones Telerate;
andIhadateam ofadozenorsodevelopersonsite.Wereportedtoahard-corebullywhoI’llsimplycall
John.
John wouldcall meinto his officedailyand beratemefor anhour aboutallthe problemsmypeople were
presumably causing. I dreaded leaving at night. I would sneak out to the elevator and hope that John
wasn’t on it. If he were, he insisted that I come back to his office for another hour or two of abusive
language.
Fortunately,mypeople(andI)wereprettywellprotectedbymysuperbprojectmanagerwhoknewhowto
standuptoJohnandgethim off our backs.Infact,I’ll namehim.Hewas RonByer,Jr.,nowPresident of
NetWeaveIntegratedSolutions.
I remember one incident in which one of my female contractors had to skip a day to get her sick child to
the hospital. When she returned the next day, John accosted her and demanded that she never take
another day off, no matter the reason. She, being a mother, was not about to back down; and she and
John got into a nose-to-nose shouting match. It took Ron to get in the middle of them to break up the
fight.
Toour delight,John was letgo byTeleratetoward the end of the project.Weweretold it was because of
hisbullying.Toourhorror,hereturnedamonthlater.
When the project ended, Telerate did indeed fire him. He came to me looking for help in finding a job
(bullies just don’t see the other side). I lined him up with an interview with another customer of ours, a
part-timebully.I thoughtit wouldbegreat toseethesetwo interacting witheach other. Unfortunately, our
part-timebullydidn’twantanythingtodowithJohn.Ihaven’theardfromhimsince.
Summary
Richardson’s book is a quick read – about an hour or two. It is an excellent book to read if you have ever
been the subject of workplace bullying, whether minor or intense. Even if you think you maybe a bully, it
is worthwhile reading this book to try to get a feel for the other side of the picture. Furthermore,
Richardsongivesgoodadvicetofollowifyoushouldeverbethesubjectofbullying.
3
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com
|---|--|
| 0 |  |