IT Disaster Recovery Planning for Dummies
September2015
The early, single mainframe data center has given way to massive data centers
containing hundreds of servers and terabytes (if not petabytes) of data. Data centers
have become decentralized, with companies deploying multiple data centers around the world.
Networkingisnowjustascriticalasprocessingresources.Computer-room operatorshavebeenreplaced
by lights-out data centers. The requirements for outage recovery have shrunk from days to hours and in
somecasesevenminutes.
However, many data center managers have been unable to effectively address disaster recovery. In
some cases, it is because of a lack of knowledge or a lack of resources. In other cases, there has been
nocommitmentonthepartofmanagement.
Peter Gregory’s book, “IT Disaster Recovery Planning for Dummies,”1 provides IT management with the
knowledge required to develop a disaster recovery plan (DRP). Companies are largely powerless to stop
disasters;but withproper disaster recoveryplanning, the effects of thedisaster can bemitigated;and the
companycansurvive.
Starting with an Interim Plan
The author estimates that the development of a DRP may take about three months for very small
companies and one totwo years for alarge organization.Hethereforerecommends thatacompanystart
withaninterimDRP.
An interim DRPcan be completedina few days bya handfulof keypeople. It answers the question,“If a
disasteroccurstomorrow,whatstepscanwefollowtorecoveroursystems?”
An interim DRP begins by building an emergencyresponse team of subject matter experts and providing
them withtheprocedures for declaringanemergency. Communicationprocedures areestablishedfor the
emergency response team to communicate with each other and with other critical people in the
organizationundervariousscenariosofcommunicationfacilitylosses.
Roughed-in procedures are developed to get critical systems running again, including what to do if the
building housing the systems is destroyed. The DRP must be documented and the emergency response
team trained. The interim DRP should be reviewed every few months and updated to reflect changes in
thebusiness’practicesandtheITsystemarchitectureuntilafullDRPhasbeencompleted.
An interim DRP is a poor substitute for a full DRP, but it can provide some disaster response in the short
term.
1ITDisasterRecoveryPlanningforDummies,PeterGregory,JohnWileyandSons,Inc.;2008.
1
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

The Full DR Project
Before initiating a disaster recovery project, it is important to ensure that there are executive sponsors.
Theyare top management, C-level managers who fully support the effort that will be needed to complete
theplanandwhowillsupplythefundingrequiredbytheproject.
TheBusinessImpactAnalysis
The first step in the DR project is a Business Impact Analysis (BIA). The BIA quantifies the effect on the
organization of the interruption of any critical business function. It helps to identify the most critical
businessprocessesandhowquicklyacompanyneedstorecoverthem.
The BIA should focus on several key aspects of the organization, including business processes,
informationsystems,otherassets(machinery,etc.),people,andsuppliers.
Foreachcriticalbusinessfunction,severalparametersshouldbedetermined.Theyinclude:
 MTD –theMaximum TolerableDowntime,or how longabusiness process canbedownbeforeit
threatensthesurvivalofthebusiness.
 RTO – the Recovery Time Objective, or the maximum period of time that an application can be
downbeforerestartingit.
 RPO–theRecoveryPointObjective,orthemaximumamountofdatathatcanbelost.
 CriticalPersonnel–alistofallemployeeswhoarecriticaltothebusinessprocess.
 Suppliers –thelistof externalsuppliers of services or products thatareimportant tothe business
process.
 Criticality–ameasureofthecriticalityofthebusinessprocesstotheorganization.
 RiskAnalysis–theprobabilitythatvariousdisasterswilladverselyaffectthebusinessprocess.
Based on theBIA, estimates canbe madefor the amount ofmoneythat wouldbe reasonabletoinvestin
eachbusinessprocessforthepurposeofdisasterrecovery.
MappingBusinessFunctionstoInfrastructure
In order to determine what must be accpmplished to recover a business function that has been taken out
by a disaster, its dependence upon the corporate infrastructure must be understood. In terms of IT, this
infrastructure includes workstations, servers, storage, networks, operating systems, and application
software.
Data-flow diagrams of all business processes should be generated to show the interaction of users with
the applications, the interaction of applications with each other, and the flow of data between users and
applications. With these diagrams, intersystem dependencies can be determined. If a particular
application goes down, what business functions are affected? If a communication facilityfails, what tasks
canusersnolongerperform?
UserRecovery
Users are primarilyconnected to IT services via their workstations. In today’s technology, the workstation
is generally a web browser communicating with various web sites. Replacing a web browser that has
2
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

beendestroyedinadisasterisstraightforward–simplygivetheuseranotherterminalwithawebbrowser
andtheappropriateplug-ins.
However,olderapplicationsusedclient/servertechnology.Inthesecases,muchoftheapplicationlogicis
located in the client workstation. To replace such a workstation, the application logic must be available
along with all the patches that have been made to it. Ensuring that these client applications are available
isakeycomponentoftheDRP.
In addition, users need access to common services such as print servers, file servers, and application
servers (for client/server applications). These services must be restored before the users can be fully
functional.
Inmanycases,usersalsousetheirworkstationsaslocalcomputers.Theymayusestandardapplications
suchas MicrosoftOffice,or theymayusecustom applications.Custom applicationsmustbeavailablefor
reloading into replacement user workstations. In addition, word documents, specialized spreadsheets,
and other work products created by standard applications such as Microsoft Office must be replaced. As
part of the DRP, there should be methodologies for all of these specialized applications and work
productstobesafelystoredexternallysoastosurviveadisaster.
End-user communications must also be restored. This includes Internet connections, email, voice, and
faxfacilities.
FacilitiesProtectionandRecovery
Facilities that must be recovered include information processing facilities (data centers) as well as work
locationsforpersonnel.
Disaster recovery planning for facilities starts with protection to avoid severe damage in the first place.
Facilityprotectionincludes:
 Physicalaccesscontrol
 Electricpower(UPSandgenerators)
 Firedetectionandsuppression
 Avoidingchemicalhazards
 Water/floodingprotection
Physical access control can include key-card or biometric entry controls, man-traps (dual doors), video
surveillance,securityguards,lockingcabinets,andequipmentcages.Ahardenedfacilitymightincludeno
windowsortheuseofbulletproofglass,fences,andequipmentbracing.
Electric-powerprotectionincludesaUPSsystemtocovershortelectricaloutagesandageneratorsystem
toprovidepowerforextendedoutages.
Fire detection systems include smoke detectors, heat detectors, and ionization detectors. Fire
suppression systems should use gas to smother the fire.Water-based suppression systems will damage
theITsystems.
If a company works with hazardous materials, the materials should be safely stored with plans for
handlingaccidentalspillsorotherreleases.
Water detectors should be installed in the lowest places in the IT facility. All equipment should be
positionedonfloorswellaboveanyfloodthreat.Thisincludesbackupgenerators.
For critical applications, a remote site should be provided in case the primary site is destroyed. The
remotesitecouldbea:
3
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

 hotstandby–withapplicationsloaded,acurrentdatabase,readytogo
 warmstandby–serversandstorageinplacebutnoapplicationsloaded
 coldstandby–emptyprocessingcenters
SystemandNetworkRecovery
The BIA defines the critical business processes and the applications and databases that are required to
support these business processes. The detailed configuration information for each server should be
recorded, kept updated, and stored in a secure facility that can be accessed following a disaster. The
samerequirementappliestooperatingsystems,storage,network components,securitycomponents,and
userauthenticationandauthorizationinformation.
The reconstruction of networking facilities can be particularlycomplex if network diagrams do not exist or
iftheconfigurationparametersforthevariousnetworkdevicesarenotavailable.
There are additional considerations for distributed computing environments if a data center is destroyed
and must be rebuilt at another location. If there are custom interfaces between applications, these must
be recovered and deployed. Communication latency must be controlled so that applications do not time
out due to communication delays. The new facility should be positioned so that personnel can commute
toitreasonably.
To the extent possible, the IT architecture should rely on standard components with common
configurations. This will ease the replacement process, which is otherwise made complex by having to
configureeachsystemaccordingtospecializedconfigurationparameters.
During this recovery effort, it is important to continue to protect data. Many security laws and regulations
governtheprivacyandsecurityofdata,andtheserequirementsarenotliftedduetoadisaster.
Many data centers today use clusters for high availability. The clusters may be local, or they may be
geographicallydistributed.Theydependuponacommondatabasethatmayeitherbyasingleinstanceor
multiple distributed instances kept synchronized via mirroring or data replication. They may be operating
in an active/passive mode (some servers are acting as idle backups) or in an active/active mode (all
serversareprocessingdata).TheDRPmustcontainproceduresforrecoveringpartorallofacluster.
DataRecovery
The most valuable IT asset is the organization’s data. Data in all likelihood will be lost in a disaster. It is
therefore imperative that procedures be established to recover that data. The RPO in the BIA indicates
theamountofdataforeachbusinessprocesswhoselossispermissiblefollowingadisaster.
Even in the event of no disaster, disks fail and can lose data. Therefore, critical data should be stored on
resilientstoragesuchasRAIDormirroreddisks.
There are several methods available to back up data so that it is recoverable. The classic technique is
magnetic tape. The tapes can be stored offsite so that they will not be affected by a disaster. When data
is to be restored, the tapes are accessed and are used to reload the database. Backing up data via
magnetic tapeis the leastcostlyof allof thebackupmethods.However,its biggestdisadvantage is thatit
can take days or even weeks to reload a large database, making tape backup viable only for those
businessprocesseswithasuitablylongRTO.Ontheotherhand,magnetictapeisusedtostoredatathat
hasarequirementforalongretentioncycle.
Data can be protected by creating a copy via mirroring or data replication. With mirroring, the storage
system copies everynewblock toaremotesystem tocreateabackupcopy.Mirroringis synchronous,so
thedistancebetweentheprimarycopyandmirroredcopyistypicallylimitedtoafewkilometers.
4
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Data replication replicates data (usually transactions) asynchronously to a remote site. The application is
unaware of the replication activity, and the remote site can be hundreds or thousands of miles awayfrom
the production site. Data replication is often used for electronic vaulting, in which a copy of the data is
stored at a remote facility where it is available to upload to a system following a disaster. Data replication
is also used to keep the database of a remote hot-standbysystem up-to-date so that the standbysystem
cantakeoverprocessingonamoment’snoticeshouldtheprimarysystemfail.
Writing and Managing the Disaster Recovery Plan
Documentation
The author, Peter Gregory, goes into great detail on the content of the written disaster recovery plan. It
shouldinclude:
 aprocedurefordeclaringadisaster.
 emergencycontacts.
 emergencyleader(maydependupontheeffectsofthedisaster).
 damageassessmentprocedures.
 systemrecoveryandrestartprocedures.
 proceduresforthetransitionbacktonormaloperations.
 recoveryteamselection(dependsupontheeffectsofthedisaster).
ThedocumentedDRPmustbestoredinasecurefacilitythatwillnotbeaffectedbyadisastersothatitis
always available. It also may be desirable to distribute hard and soft (USB) copies to the recovery team.
Onesuggestionistoprovidelaminatedwalletcardswithalloftheemergencycontactinformationonit.
Testing
A DRP is useless if it doesn’t work. It is therefore important to test it periodically. Five levels of testing
maybeincorporated:
 Papertests–IndividualstaffmembersreviewtheDRPontheirown.Correctionsandsuggestions
forimprovementarepassedtotheDRPprojectmanagerforupdatingtheDRP.
 Walkthrough tests – Similar to a paper test, but the walkthrough test is performed in a common
meetingwithagroupofexpertsratherthanexpertsworkingalone.
 Simulation tests – A walkthrough test under a specific disaster scenario. The disaster is scripted
over a period of time, and the disaster response team reacts to the unfolding scenario according
totheDRP.
 Parallel testing – Disaster-response personnel actually perform the steps in the disaster recovery
procedures. This includes such activities as building servers and bringing up applications.
However,thistestinghasnoimpactonactualITservices.
 Cutover testing – Cutover testing is the real thing. The production systems are taken down and
recovered to the backup systems. This testing carries with it a great deal of risk.If the cutover is
unsuccessful,ITservicesaredown.
Thefollowingtestschedulesaresuggested:
 Papertests–asoftenasprocedureschange
 WalkthroughandSimulationtests–quarterly
 Paralleltests–annually
 Cutovertests–annuallyorbiennially
5
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

KeepingDRPlansandStaffCurrent
The need to update the DRP is affected bymanyfactors. The IT infrastructure may be updated with new
servers or other equipment. Business processes may change. Key personnel may leave. The
organization’smarketmayevolve.
Any of these conditions will require that the DRP be updated. Anytime the DRP is updated, the key
emergencyresponseteammembersmustberetrained.
It is important to make disaster recovery planning a key element in corporate restructuring, such as IT
changes and business process modifications. As these moves are considered, the effect on disaster
recoveryproceduresshouldbeaninherenttopicfordiscussion.
Planning for Disaster Scenarios
The book continues with discussions related to surviving a multitude of disaster types. The first line of
defense is prevention. Prevention methods can be applied to site selection, fire prevention, HVAC
(heating, ventilation, and air conditioning failures), power-related failures, civil unrest and war, industrial
hazards,hardwareandsoftwarefailures,peopleerrors,andsecurityincidents.
The book concludes with planning for disasters. Natural disasters discussed include earthquakes,
wildfires, volcanos, floods, wind and ice storms, hurricanes, tornadoes, tsunamis, landslides and
avalanches, and pandemics. Man-made disasters include utility failures, civil disturbances, terrorism and
war,andsecurityincidents.
Appendices
Thebookcontainsseverallistsofsignificantresources,including:
 Disasterrecoveryplanningtools
 Disasterrecoveryplanningwebsites
 Essentialsfordisasterplanningsuccess
 Benefitsofdisasterrecoveryplanning
Summary
“IT Disaster Recovery Planning for Dummies” carries on the Dummies-series tradition of books that are
easy to read and complete in their detail. The over 300 pages of this book offer a detailed insight into
disasterrecoveryplanning.ItbecomesclearthatthecreationofagoodDRPrequiresagreatdealoftime
of many subject-matter experts in the organization and therefore must be supported actively by upper
management. Furthermore, the DRP requires continual updating and therefore a continuing commitment
onthepartofuppermanagement.
The other major consideration in a good DRP is testing. Disaster recovery procedures are not of much
value if they do not work. However, testing a DRP can be a risky venture. Therefore, several levels of
testing are described. The final level is a full cutover that, if unsuccessful, could take down IT services.
However,thealternativeistorelyonfaithandhopewhenadisasterhits.
Acknowledgement
Ourthankstooursubscriber,TerryCritchley,forpointingustothisbook.
6
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com