that allowed them to remotely take control of the manufacturer's hoover and use the video feed to
spy on anything in the device's vicinity. And, the researchers said, the attack could also compromise
refrigerators, ovens, dishwashers, washing machines, dryers and air conditioners -- any connected
thing controlled by the LG app.
https://t.co/CaRYBBPwCD
6
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Dell web address grabbed by a third party for a month
A web address used by Dell to help customers restore their data was taken over by a third party for
a month last summer. The backup and recovery program installed on Dell computers periodically
checks a web address called DellBackupandRecoveryCloudStorage.com. A software backup and
imaging company called SoftThinks, one of Dell's partners, previously had control of this address but
it appears it forgot to renew the domain in mid-June.
https://t.co/VgVEKbB9hE
1% downtime is too high for compliance: The benefits of continuous availability in
access control
Continuous availability solutions can deliver 99.999% uptime – equivalent to just five minutes of
downtime per year. Continuous availability means that no single point of failure can stop a
security software platform from running. And unlike high availability, back-up and clustering
solutions, there is no failover or reboot required and therefore minimal downtime. In a business
environment where non-compliance can have serious consequences, adding a continuous
availability solution to support an existing or new access control system would seem to be one of
the easiest decisions to make.
https://t.co/4PeyR3BNvX
Blockchain Takes Away a Cybercriminal's Greatest Edge
Centralized architectures—which account for most of today's Internet services—concentrate data,
hardware, and other vital resources in a small number of physical and virtual servers. This structure
burdens Amazon, Google, Microsoft, and other large public cloud companies hosting large numbers
of critical websites and services with the heavy responsibility of securing all of these resources and
keeping them running in the face of an ever-evolving threat landscape. Many experts and
organizations believe that decentralizing vital services will make them more resilient against
cyberattacks. Blockchain, the decentralized technology that ushered in the era of cryptocurrencies,
has already begun to re-shape the digital landscape.
https://t.co/n8CoBJNRF5
Airline system glitches - is the chaos avoidable through better testing & QA?
To say the airline industry is beleaguered is putting it mildly. If it isn’t Ryanair and its cancellation of
thousands of flights or Monarch going into administration, it’s an airline or airport tech issue hitting
the headlines on almost a weekly basis. And the cause of most of these tech disasters? Almost all
of them can be put down to undetected software bugs and inadequate testing and quality assurance
(QA). If not tested properly, bugs can slip through the net and go into production, causing all manner
of problems. Even the BA IT worker who took out the wrong plug – this was a failure in the QA
process and methodology that should be part and parcel of testing strategy.
https://t.co/rlubIFS9xP
The ridiculously fast Marea transatlantic Internet cable is complete
Microsoft and Facebook may not be as cool as SpongeBob, but they do now have a mighty under-
the-sea cable that is almost as impressive as a pineapple. The two companies have completed their
Marea subsea cable, a groundbreaking – or should that be seabreaking? – infrastructure project that
will funnel vast quantities of high-speed data more than 17,000 feet under the Atlantic Ocean.
https://t.co/bNUO1LgoiX
7
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

When system downtime simply isn't an option, Stratus ftServer is the answer
When superb processing performance is vital, and there is limited or no on-site IT support available,
choose Stratus ftServer: the world's first, simple 'fault tolerance in a box' integrated solution.
With three different models of ftServer, hardware-based fault tolerance is available to suit
requirements and budget, no matter what. Each ftServer model is completely scalable and flexible,
tailor-made to your own specific requirements.
https://t.co/bAU4ppQkey
Why tape is still strong
Tape storage is one of those technological hangovers from the early days of computing, associated
in the minds of many with rooms full of massive mainframe cabinets. Somewhat like the mainframe,
tape shows no signs of going away just yet, and ironically, could even be handed a new lease of life
thanks to the burgeoning volumes of data that are being accumulated in modern data centers.
https://t.co/IEqrSDQoiF
National Electricity Grid Suffers System Collapse
The Transmission Company of Nigeria (TCN) said a total system collapse of the national electricity
grid was recorded on September 28 at 8:03 p.m. It resulted in a temporary loss of electricity
generation for the nation’s power grid.
https://t.co/M7HCvwD5do
Gas suppression system, fire extinguisher cause outage in London college
A London college was forced to call in a team of technical cleaners after the fire suppression system
in its server room unloaded inert gas and debris onto the live IT equipment, and a fire extinguisher
was “accidentally deployed.”
https://t.co/m4oaYAB1Bz
How New, Resilient Networks Change Data Center Design
There is a view among some data center industry insiders that, at a very basic level, software and
networks will take on an even greater role when it comes to ensuring service availability. That could
have significant long-term implications for how future data centers are designed and managed, with
some types of site requiring less redundant power and cooling equipment.
https://t.co/WV1xrZ6gOv
“Yawn, another outage”
It’s human nature to quickly become highly dependent on new innovations soon after they arrive —
imagine mobile phones or the Internet were just taken away tomorrow. But we need to ensure this
new wave of digital services and Internet-connected world is secure before we become fully reliant
on it.
https://t.co/ghmukWMBRy
8
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Australia headed for peak hour Internet collapse as Netflix use surges
Australia’s Internet is at risk of collapse at peak hour as the public’s love of Internet streaming
outpaces the broadband network’s capacity to handle the traffic, an expert has warned. “The
network could effectively stop between 5pm to 9pm.” The unprecedented uptake of high definition
(HD) online streaming services, such as Netflix, put Australia in danger of a network collapse during
peak time despite the nation’s biggest-ever $49 billion infrastructure spend on the national
broadband network (NBN).
https://t.co/OyRVn7kIN2
Availability Digest Oldie but Goodie: "Fire Suppressant’s Impact on Hard Disks"
Occasional reports have surfaced in the last few years describing damage to hard-disk drives
following a discharge of a gaseous fire-suppression system. Tests by major providers of these
systems have confirmed that such damage can occur and that it is related to extreme noise
generated during such a discharge. However, the noise specifically due to the discharge of gas is
not the primary culprit. The biggest effect on disk drives is caused by the fire alarms that accompany
the discharge. There are reasonably simple steps that a data center can take to minimize this
damage.
https://t.co/cnstOfumsH
UK National Lottery Hit by Peak-Time DDoS Attack
The UK National Lottery has confirmed a distributed denial-of-service attack (DDoS) was behind an
outage that took its website and mobile application offline for more than an hour during peak time on
a Saturday evening in early October. The attack ran from 6 p.m. to 7:30 p.m. The lottery closes ticket
sales on Saturday evenings at 7:30 p.m., meaning users were left unable to buy last-minute tickets
on the day.
https://t.co/n08QClSTpC
Microsoft Says Azure Outage Caused by Accidental Fire-Suppression Gas Release
An accidental release of fire-suppression agent into the data center environment in Europe triggered
a chain of events that led to an Azure cloud outage for a group of customers on September 29. In
what has become common practice for cloud providers, Microsoft said customers with redundant
virtual machines deployed across multiple isolated hardware clusters would not have been affected
by the outage. The Azure-specific name for this high-availability feature is “Availability Sets.”
https://t.co/vLER1aZTvb
Why Wind Operators Need Predictive Analytics Right Now
Last March in northwest Iowa. was a typical late-winter day. The temperature wouldn’t break the
freezing mark. Snow fell off and on throughout the day. The wind blew, turning the blades of wind
turbines that punctuate the region’s horizon. Although things seemed normal, something remarkable
was happening. Four-hundred miles away, predictive analytics software had been monitoring data
from the wind turbines. As the software’s data science models combed through the data, it spotted
an anomaly in one wind turbine’s gearbox. The data insight predicting a future gearbox failure led
the owner of the turbine to perform a few hours of predictive maintenance that cost $5,000. In the
end, that work saved the owner from having a more catastrophic, $250,000 problem and at least
several days of downtime.
9
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

https://t.co/B8sATOnyBb
It’s worse than you think. The Equifax breach shows the dystopian gap between wealth
and competence in America
Former Equifax CEO Richard Smith essentially blamed a cyberattack that hit 145 million Americans
on one employee who “owns the patch process” for fixing known vulnerabilities.
https://t.co/HHTrGVsDfd
How will the cloud be able to handle the emergence of IoT
Cloud computing and the Internet of Things (IoT) have spent the last several years in a sort of
maximum-acceleration race where they’ve lapped the other players several times over and have
only one another against which to measure.
https://t.co/t7iiIPwqJE
Not All Carriers are Equal When Addressing Network Outages
In an effort to stem the financial loss from an outage - not to mention the impact on angry, frustrated
customers and potential PR fallout - companies have tried to enforce network safeguards. However,
despite best efforts, an industry survey analysis found mobile operators suffer from an average of
five network outages or degradations every year. Despite precautions that are being implemented, it
has historically been a very real challenge to quickly reroute voice traffic to resolve an outage and
prevent further impairment. With the heavy financial risks associated with network outages, it’s
becoming critical for businesses of all sizes to analyze available telecom solutions and select a
carrier option that works best for your industry, company size, and customer base.
https://t.co/IkeE2y4dla
Login credentials of over 6,000 Indian government departments, businesses put up for
sale on DarkNet
The login credentials and other confidential data of more than 6,000 Indian ISPs, government
departments and private businesses were put up for sale on DarkNet. Seqrite Cyber Intelligence
Labs and seQtree InfoServices discovered an advertisement on DarkNet allegedly selling access to
the servers and database dump of an unspecified "internet registry.” The researchers identified the
affected agency as India's National Internet Registry - Indian Registry for Internet Names and
Numbers (IRINN) - which falls under the National Internet Exchange of India (NIXI). The team said
the hackers were selling the allegedly stolen data for 15 Bitcoins.
https://t.co/4VVmV9TKyx
Interesting article - "A Flaw in the Design"
Those who helped design the Internet over subsequent decades focused on the technical
challenges of moving information quickly and reliably. When they thought about security, they
foresaw the need to protect the network against potential intruders or military threats. However, they
didn’t anticipate that the Internet’s own users would someday use the network to attack one another.
https://t.co/oofDYjU6ef
10
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Oracle debuts autonomous cloud database for data warehouse workloads
Oracle Autonomous Database Cloud uses machine learning to eliminate human maintenance
and error, offering self-driving, self-scaling and self-repairing database functions. The company
claims performance 10 times faster than and half the cost of Amazon's RedShift system. The
autonomous cloud service offers customer simpler service and instant elasticity, according to
the announcement. The database comes with a 99.995% availability guarantee.
https://t.co/0POnC5qvd3
The Sky Fell in Puerto Rico. The Microgrid Argument is not Chicken Little
Hurricane Maria showed that warnings about the vulnerabilities of centralized electric grids – and the
need for microgrid development — are not overstated. When the hurricane hit the U.S. territory on
September 20th, it knocked out power to 100 percent of 1.57 million accounts served by the Puerto
Rico Electric Power Authority (PREPA), the island’s utility. This kind of scenario is exactly what
microgrid proponents have described as possible anywhere when electric reliability depends almost
solely on an interconnected central grid without the support of microgrids and related distributed
energy. Before, the argument may have sounded hypothetical, improbable, maybe even apocalyptic.
Puerto Rico made it real.
https://t.co/jXhy9PCHOz
11
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

