the electricity through 12 grid stations to the affected areas till Wednesday morning. It was the third
major breakdown recently in Karachi.
https://t.co/FIaHo1BcuP
Is Estonia a Preview of Our Tech Future?
“On a Spring afternoon, I’m gazing out the window of an office building on the outskirts of Estonia’s
capital, Tallinn, watching people stroll below, when a cream-colored plastic container mounted on
black wheels rounds the corner and begins maneuvering its way among the pedestrians. The device
looks like a kid’s toy. But in reality, it’s a high-tech delivery robot called Starship and potentially the
next mega-profitable invention to spring from this snowy, miniature country on the northern edge of
Europe—one of the more unexpected launching pads on the planet.“ Fun fact: Skype was invented
in Estonia.
5
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

https://t.co/odeDNpLf3O
Why veteran of a legacy vendor joined core banking startup crowd
The number of cloud-based core banking startups is on the rise. The latest is Finxact, which formally
launched in May. For founder and CEO Frank Sanchez, this is a return to his roots. In the early
1980s, Frank Sanchez and his brother Mike started Sanchez Computer Associates and created a
core banking system called Profile. They sold the system to several Eastern European banks, then
sold the company to FIS in 2004. Sanchez then ran the Enterprise Banking Division at FIS for eight
years.
https://t.co/EFHCPt7LBn
Twitter down, users unable to post as micro-blogging site faces temporary outage for
second day
Micro-blogging website Twitter on 10 May faced a temporary outage for the second consecutive day.
Users were unable to make any posts while the social networking website was down. On Tuesday, 9
May, Facebook and Twitter both faced temporary outages.
https://t.co/N87LTzWyY1
Preparing the Nation for Intense Space Weather
The entire Canadian province of Québec, which covers twice as much area as the U.S. State of
Texas, was plunged into darkness on the morning of March 13, 1989. An intense geomagnetic storm
seized Québec’s power-grid system, tripping relays, damaging high-voltage transformers, and
causing a blackout. This geomagnetic storm’s impact on Québec pales in comparison to what could
happen in the future. A report by the National Academy of Sciences suggests that a rare but
powerful magnetic superstorm could cause continent-wide loss of electricity and substantial damage
to power-grid infrastructure that could persist for months and cost the nation in excess of $1 trillion.
https://t.co/VEEN7Mi0Ic
GE patches flaws allowing attackers to ‘disconnect power grid at will’
Researchers have discovered a significant software flaw in the energy grid equipment sold by
General Electric (GE) that could allow even lone attackers with limited resources to “disconnect
sectors of the power grid at will.” In May, GE announced that it had issued fixes for five of the six
flaws, with the last on its way.
https://t.co/iLyVDekL19
Installing solar to combat national security risks in the power grid
Solar technology could help make the power grid more resilient to attacks and natural disasters.
Many military bases are located in regions with a history of power outages. Microgrids could serve
as back-ups to prevent service disruption during natural disasters and attacks.
https://t.co/SThBHjvUSO
6
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Cartu Bank Ensures Continuous Availability of Payment Services for Georgian
Businesses
Cartu Bank understands the need for continuous availability with more than 60% of all e-commerce
transactions in the Eastern European country of Georgia going through its payment switch. Read
this HPE case study to learn how HPE NonStop servers with HPE Shadowbase software run
mission-critical BASE24 payment engines to keep the Georgian economy running 24×7.
https://t.co/Qg2E7iGxXq
Spy agency back-up generators failed during power outage
Back-up electricity failed at Australia's electronic spy agency that prevents national cyber-attacks
when a cable fault cut off energy supply in January. Defence officials told a parliamentary inquiry
hearing that the Australian Signals Directorate lost electricity from ActewAGL, and back-up
generators failed to power one of its two buildings for two hours during the outage. The ASD is
relying on diesel generators needing parts no longer manufactured to prevent a power shut-down.
https://t.co/0vqinpLVyB
If it's not poltergeists or the Russians, it could be your power utility
Here's a mystery for your wall of weird. All of a sudden, six battery backups died at the same time
(with no visible power problems). Read on to learn how we solved the mystery and how six brave
little UPSs gave their lives in service to geekdom.
https://t.co/lScydT4JaN
Southwest Braces for Upgrade of 30-Year-Old Reservations System
Southwest Airlines Co. plans to shift its domestic reservation system to a new platform in early May,
attempting to avoid the havoc that plagued similar transitions at other carriers. Southwest is
spending $500 million, its biggest technology update ever, as it moves from a 30-year-old system.
The Dallas-based company began using the new tools in December to book customers who were
traveling May 9 and later to phase in the transition. The three-year process has included extensive
employee training and months of testing. (Note: transition was successful)
https://t.co/QXQO1pKaSK
HPE tells Nutanix 'we're not partners' in software scuffle
HPE has made clear to customers that it is not partners with Nutanix after the latter opened up its
Enterprise Cloud Platform software to allow users to install it on HPE ProLiant and Cisco UCS B-
series servers.
https://t.co/K9n4xgUGpk
Key to Improving Subway Service in New York? Modern Signals
At a subway station deep under Manhattan, a dingy room is filled with rows of antique equipment
built before World War II. The weathered glass boxes and cloth-covered cables are not part of a
museum exhibit. Instead, they are crucial pieces of the signal system that directs traffic in one of the
busiest subways in the world. Much of the signal equipment at that station, at West Fourth Street, is
decades beyond its life span; and it is one of the main culprits plaguing the overburdened subway.
https://t.co/g8zkM6ulWe
7
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Banks should let ancient programming language COBOL die
“This extremely critical part of the economic infrastructure of the planet is run on a very old piece of
technology — which in itself is fine — if it weren’t for the fact that the people servicing that
technology are a dying race.”
https://t.co/hIqz4BrSeE
Antiquated crew-tracking system at the root of another major Delta tech debacle
Delta Airlines’ crew-tracking system fell apart when a series of thunderstorms hit the Atlanta
area in early April, causing flight to be delayed or cancelled. The breakdown prevented the
airline crews from receiving assignments from Delta’s operation center, making the situation
much worse and eventually resulting in 4,000 cancellations. In many cases, crews didn't show
up for flights, because they were unaware of their assignment.
https://t.co/NIoof4XBOk
The plan to make America’s nukes great again could go horribly wrong
It was nearly 2 o’clock in the morning on Oct. 23, 2010, when an Air Force lieutenant called from his
base in Wyoming to report the nightmare scenario unfolding before him. Fifty intercontinental ballistic
missiles — each tipped with a nuclear warhead 20 times more powerful than the bomb the U.S.
dropped on Hiroshima — had suddenly lost contact with the computers at the base’s launch center.
https://t.co/t8tatybn3G
Four nines and failure rates: Will the cloud ever cut it for transactional banking?
Banks looking to take their cloud plans to the next level are likely to have returned to the drawing
board following the latest Amazon Web Services outage, which disrupted the online activities of
major organizations from Apple to the US Securities and Exchange Commission. One estimate
suggests US financial services companies alone lost $160 million – in just four hours. It’s been a
timely reminder that any downtime is too much in an always-on digital economy, certainly for
financial services. The sobering point is that AWS was still delivering within the terms of its service-
level agreement (SLA). This promises 99.99% service and data availability (otherwise known as
“four nines” availability). This may be good enough for a lot of things, but it won’t do for banking.
https://t.co/RQPX6AJ4M4
WhatsApp Back Online After Global Outage
WhatsApp went down, and the world went a little nuts. Literally, the world. Widespread outages were
first reported around 4 p.m. Wednesday, May 3rd. The problem was mostly resolved by 7 p.m. the
same night. But during that time, no one on the planet could use WhatsApp. And that’s a lot of
people. WhatsApp is considered the world’s second largest social media platform, though it’s largely
used as a messenger app. At last count, it has 1.2 billion active users monthly. It’s only beaten by
Facebook, which owns WhatsApp.
https://t.co/BWDWQNk1ng
8
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Blockchain: The smart person's guide
This comprehensive guide covers everything you need to know about the blockchain, the innovative
technology that powers Bitcoin, Litecoin, and other cryptocurrencies.
https://t.co/v54sANWAIe
From Good to Great: The Path to 99.5 Percent to + 99.9 Percent System and Application
Uptime
We can thank SaaS providers for raising the bar with regard to system and application availability.
Today, while 99.5% system and application uptime is considered “standard” by most cloud
providers, this equates to 3.42 hours of downtime per month – a significant speed bump in today’s
always–on business environment. Increasingly, this “min” bar is being raised to 99.9% - a figure
which equates to 38 minutes (or less) of downtime per month. How will IT organizations meet this
uptime imperative without significantly increasing costs?
https://t.co/mOfPL4MZD2
The Evolution of High Availability
The traditional view of designing for and achieving high availability systems has been concentrated
on hardware and software. Recently, people have recognized the importance of ‘fat finger’ trouble
causing outages. If we can minimize the hardware and software issues and reduce finger trouble by
rigorous operations procedures, then the problem is solved. Or is it? There are other factors which
are either not recognized or understood.
https://t.co/P9lvY70ArX
The 7 worst automation failures
There are IT jobs that you just know are built for failure. They are so big and cumbersome and in some
cases are plowing through new ground that unforeseen outcomes are likely. Then there are other
situations where an IT pro might just say “whoops” when that unforeseen result should have been, well,
foreseen.
https://t.co/6guRUFT9ut
Feds: Human Error, Labeling Led to Chemical Cloud in Kansas
Human error and labeling and design problems led to the release of a large chemical cloud over a
city in the U.S. state of Kansas in 2016. The incident sent more than 140 people to the hospital and
caused others to stay indoors or evacuate for several hours.
https://t.co/tx0EN3zmMD
9
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

The Human Factor: The unspoken threat in cybersecurity
Ever since there have been humans, there have been human errors – and some of them have been
whoppers (like the Japanese trader's “fat finger” trading error that cost his company $600 billion).
Doing tasks that they really don't understand or mistakenly pushing a button or pulling a lever,
people are the root cause of 90% of air traffic control errors, over 50% of factory equipment failures
after maintenance, 37% of downtime at pharmaceutical firms, and in one of the biggest flubs of all
time, human error nearly destroyed Kansas. Such errors can destroy a company, too – by allowing
hackers access to sensitive data.
https://t.co/st0H7ukXaZ
SAN outages put dent in ATO's cybersecurity
The high-profile failure of an ATO (Australian Taxation Office) storage area network (SAN) left the
tax office struggling to be compliant with its IT security obligations. A submission by the ATO to the
joint committee of public accounts and trust shows while the agency had been tracking well to meet
the ASD's top four mitigation strategies this year, the well-documented SAN failures put a dent in its
overall IT security profile.
https://t.co/Igcqi1fXQa
Block Island to start getting wind power
In early May, Block Island (in U.S. State of New York) formally throw the switch on a first-time
connection to the New England energy grid through a new cable to the mainland and begin receiving
power from the country’s first five offshore wind turbines. It will end nearly a century of dependency
on loud, smoky diesel-fired power generators that burn about 1 million gallons a year.
https://t.co/SW6eNtSiab
10
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

