With 100% Uptime, Do I Need a Business Continuity Plan?
October2006
In our article entitled All About Continuous Processing Architectures, we pointed out that
active/active application networks are capable of incredible availabilities – uptimes measured in
centuries. One might well question the need for a Business ContinuityPlan if the system is never
goingtogodown.
No assumption could be more fallacious. Extreme availability does not mean an absolute 100%
uptime. Even if our calculated uptime is in the thousands of centuries, that means that on the
average there will a system failure during that interminable time. And as random events go, that
failure could be tomorrow. We might not expect another one for 10,000 years, but we had better
be able to deal with tomorrow’s failure. That is why we always need a good Business Continuity
Plan.Howisthebusinessgoingtosurvivetomorrow’sfailure?
Itis truethatanactive/activeapplication network willprotectus from amyriadof faults.Hardware
faults, software faults, operator errors, environmental problems – these generally will only affect
one node. The same is true for most natural and man-made disasters. Should a node go down,
usersquicklycanbeswitchedtoothernodes.Thatiswhatactive/activeisallabout.
However, there is a wide range of faults that, though highly unlikely, could take down your entire
application network. This is why a good Business Continuity Plan is a must. What is the
probability that a second node could fail before the first failed node is repaired, thus leaving the
system with not enough capacity to maintain the business? No matter how small the probability
that you calculate, you may have two nodes down simultaneously someday. And that someday
mightbesoon.
Does your system have network-wide commands that could cause wide-spread damage if used
improperlybyyouroperators?Hopefully,youhaveputinsafeguardstopreventthis;buthave you
reallycoveredallofyourbases?
Are your nodes anddatabasecopies distributed widelyenoughsothattheequivalentof the2004
Northeast blackout in North America will not take down all nodes? What is the chance that a
massive network failure could disconnect all users from their nodes? Can a software bug
propagatethroughthenetwork?(Doyourememberthesoftwarebugthatpropagatedthroughthe
ATT network in 1990 and took down the entire network, thus denying telephone service to
subscribersforhours?Adecadeearlier,asimilarbugcollapsedtheARPAnet.)
What about a health crisis like the recent SARS and Avian flu scares? Fortunately, they didn’t
become an epidemic, though it was within the last century (1918 to 1919) that the Spanish flu
killed20millionto40millionpeople worldwide. This coulddecimate your operations staff.Whatif
your buildings housing your systems were quarantined by a similar epidemic and could not be
entered?
©2006SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman 1

Is your operations staff unionized? What happens in the event of a strike? Can your supervisory
staffandotherslesstrainedintheoperationscarryonservice?
And, of course, there is always the present danger of attacks by viruses, worms, hackers, and
denial-of-service attacks. No matter how smart you are at protecting your site from such outside
dangers, there is always a hacker who is smarter. Furthermore, don’t forget the easiest way for
your system to become infected – one of your people innocently bringing in his or her infected
notebookandloggingontoyoursystem.,
Consequently, there must be in place a plan directing the efforts of all concerned so that your
business can recover from such disastrous occurrences. Simply having an extremely available
system is not good enough. One must plan how to recover from a highly unlikely, but not
impossible,totalsystemoutage.
Thisplanis,ofcourse,theBusinessContinuityPlan;anditisthesubjectofmuchliteraturetoday.
Though proper business continuity planning is beyond the scope of the Availability Digest, there
is much in the way of good literature concerning these plans (just Google Business Continuity
Planning or see our review of Business Continuity Planning: IT Examination Handbook). Also,
there are many significant consulting services being offered to help you write your plan (offered
by, among others, IBM and HP). Without a good Business Continuity Plan, one cannot say that
one has approached 100% uptime because otherwise, that one-time failure of the system could
havedisastrousconsequences.
Of course, any Business Continuity Plan must be kept up-to-date and practiced periodically. A
Business Continuity Plan that does not reflect the current business or IT environment, or a plan
that is unfamiliar to the people who must implement it, is no more valuable than the dust that
coversit.
Though needed for an active/active system, Business Continuity Plans are generally associated
with “highly available” systems such as clusters in which occasional outages are expected. This
leads to an important distinction between these plans and Continuous Processing Architectures.
A Business Continuity Plan is used to recover from the effects of an outage. A Continuous
ProcessingArchitectureisusedtoavoidtheeffectsofanoutage.
©2006SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman 2
