QEI Provides Active/Active SCADA with OpenVMS
September2007
For almost 50 years, QEI of Springfield, New Jersey, (www.qeiinc.com) has been supplying
highly available SCADA systems to the electric, transit, gas, water, and other utilities. A SCADA
(SupervisoryControl and Data Acquisition) system provides controllers with the facilities required
to monitor and control the field devices upon which these utilities depend. It automatically
generates alarms should conditions in the field demand immediate controller attention and
provides a raft of historical data for trend analysis, root cause analysis, and manyother functions
importanttotheutilities.
iiHLiimLiimtit
NAHM NAHM
PENTIUM PENTIUM
Power
AutoABABABABABABABABABABABABABABABAB
ALPHASERVERDS10
QEI’s current SCADA system,TDMS-PLUS (Total Distribution Management System),focuses on
the monitoring and control of electrical power substations used for the distribution of power to
electric utility customers and transit systems. Built on the highly reliable and secure HP
OpenVMSplatform,TDMS-PLUSprovidesextremeavailabilitiesthroughtheuseofdual,triple,or
quadrupleactive/activeredundancyindisaster-tolerantconfigurations.
We first describe the TDMS application and its hardware and software architecture. We then
focusonitshigh-availabilityfeatures.
The Electrical Distribution Network
Thehouseholdandbuildingelectricalpoweruponwhichwealldependcomestousthroughthree
majorinfrastructures–generation,transmission,anddistribution:
 Electricity is generated by large electrical generators which are themselves powered by
coal,oil,gas,water,orothersources.
 This electricity is carried over long distance transmission lines to local points of
distribution. Since power loss over the transmission network is a function of the current
flowingthroughthelines,transmissionnetworksdistributeelectricityatveryhighvoltages
and low currents (power is voltage times current). Typical transmission voltages are 230
to500kilovolts.
1
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Transmission networks terminate in transmission substations, which reduce the voltage
fordistributiontohomesandbusinesses.
 From the transmission substations, the lower voltage electricity is distributed to other
distribution substations for routing to homes and offices. These substations feed the
power lines so ubiquitous on the telephone poles outside of our homes. The fact that
these lines carry electricity at a “lower voltage” is a bit misleading. The voltage on the
powerlinesoutsideofyourhomeis13,000volts.Don’ttouchadownedline!
This voltage is reduced by transformers on the poles near our homes or businesses to
the120/240voltsthatweexpect.
high-voltage
transmissionline
230-500
kilovolts
transmission
substation
distribution 13kilovolts
station
distribution
substation
gener- distribution
motor ator substation
13kilovolts
TDMS-PLUS
steam
boiler fuel
plant
120/240 controllers
volts
ElectricalDistributionSystem
QEI’s TDMS-PLUS SCADA systems are used to monitor and control the electrical network from
the distribution substations to our homes and businesses. They are also found in many major
metropolitan transit systems as well as long-haul train systems performing the same function for
powerdistributiontothetrainsandsubways.
QEI’s TDMS-PLUS
TheQEITDMS-PLUSSCADAsystemcomprisesthreemajorhardwarecomponents:
 TheMasterStation,whichprovidestheintelligenceforthesystem.
 The Worldview Controller Consoles, through which the controllers monitor and
controlthesystem.
 The Remote Terminal Units, or RTUs, which monitor the status of digital and analog
indications in the field, send field changes to the Master Station, and receive and
executecommandsonfielddevicesfromtheMasterStation.
MasterStation
TheMaster Stationruns on HPOpenVMSblades or towers.Itcanbeconfigured as astandalone
systemorinadual,triple,orquadruplemodularredundancyconfiguration,asdescribedlater.
2
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

The Master Station polls the RTUs for status changes and maintains displays of the current field
status ontheWorldviewterminals forthecontrollers.Itaccepts commandsfrom thecontrollers or
frommonitoringapplicationstosendtothefielddevices.
Eachfielddeviceisreferredtoasapoint.Therearethreetypesofpoints:
 Digital points, such as circuit breakers, are in one of two states (though multistate points
can be configured as a set of dual state points). Whenever the state of a digital point
changes,itsnewvalueissentbytheRTUtotheMasterStation.
 Analog points, such as voltage or temperature measuring devices, report a measured
value.Specifiedforeachanalogpointisadeadzonewithinwhichthevalueoftheanalog
pointmeasurementcanproperlylie.Shouldthevalueoftheanalogpointmoveoutsideof
thedeadzone,theanalogpointvalueissenttotheMasterStation.
 Computed points are pseudo-points established within the Master Station logic. The
value of a computed point is calculated based on the status and value of other points but
isotherwisetreatedasifitwereinthefield.
The Master Station maintains in
memory the status of every point. It eventlog
pointconfigurations
continually monitors the digital, analog, Database maps
and computed points for alarm
conditions. Should it detect an alarm
condition, it will notify the appropriate RTU RTU
controller bymeans of anaudible alarm
Master
and a change in the displayed status of Station: RTU etats
-monitor RTU
the offending point (for instance, by
-control RTU
changing its color and causing it to -alarm
blink).
RTU RTU RTU
The controller can attempt to correct
the alarm condition by sending points
commands to pertinent field devices.
WorldviewControllerConsoles
For instance, if the power drain on a
particular distribution line is becoming too large, he may be able to shut down some of the
devicespoweredbythatlinetoreducethepowerdrainandreturnittoanacceptablelevel.
The Master Station also maintains all persistent information on mirrored disks. This information
includes a log of all events (state changes and operator actions) with time stamps, the current
configuration of all of the points, and the maps used by the Worldview consoles. Also included
are tags. A tagged device cannot be energized mistakenly by a controller. This prevents
maintenancepeopleinthe fieldfrom beinginjured. Thecurrentsystem stateis notmaintainedon
disksinceitishighlytransient.
The database maybe replicated in real time to commercially available databases such as Oracle
or SQL Server for such offline analyses as trend analysis and root cause analysis of faults. In
addition, the event log can be played back on the Master Station to show exactly what happened
duringanincident.
WorldviewConsoles
The Worldview consoles provide graphic displays of the electrical network
andtabulardisplays ofdetailedinformation.Graphicdisplays includemaps
and “one-line” diagrams. The maps are used to display thecomplete or
partial electrical network and show where the trouble may be. Substations
3
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

and other devices are shown bysymbols.One-line diagrams are used to display devices within a
substationandshowtheirinterconnection.Thisisthemostcommonlyuseddisplay.
Some of the field devices, such as circuit breakers, are controllable. Via the console, the
controllercansendcommandstothesedevicestochangestate.Eachcommandfollowsaselect-
before-operate (SBO) sequence. The device is first selected and reports back to the Master
Stationthatithasbeenselected.Theselecteddevice isshownonthecontroller’s consolesothat
he can be assured that he is controlling the proper device. He can then execute the command
andviewtheresultingchangeinstateonhisconsole.
The Worldview consoles are also used to configure points
(name, location, analog or digital, alarm state, display
characteristics, and so on). Maps and one-line diagrams
maybebuiltviaaWorldviewutility,or theymaybeimported
from other packages suchas AutoCAD. Themaps and one-
line diagrams can be panned and zoomed and are layered
toprovidedeclutteringasacontrollerzoomsout.
The maps can be divided into zones. An operator can only
control devices in the zone to which he is assigned, though he can view device states in other
zones.
WorldviewrunsonstandardWindowsPCterminals.
RemoteTerminalUnits
The remote terminal units sit in the field and monitor the status of
digital and analog points. Theymay be contained in large cabinets
positioned in a substation, or they may be small pole-mounted
units monitoring a transformer that is stepping down voltage to a
home.
An RTU monitors multiple digital and analog points. A
communication line from the Master Station may connect to only
one RTU if that RTU is monitoring critical points or to dozens of
RTUsinruralareas.
All of the RTUs on a single communication line are polled repetitively for changes. When polled,
an RTU will send status changes, if any, to the Master Station. It will also execute commands
sent from the Master Station by selecting the specified point, confirming the selection to the
Master Station,andthenexecutingthecommanduponthereceiptof anexecutionmessagefrom
theMasterStation.
A typical TDMS-PLUS SCADA system may have dozens of RTUs monitoring thousands of
points.
Communication between the Master Station and the RTUs can be via any communication
medium, such as telephone line modems, LANs, WANs, fiber, microwave, or radio.
Communication over modems occurs at bit rates from 1,200 bps to 56 kbps. If modem
