The High Availability Design Spectrum – Part 3
Dr.TerryCritchley
February2017
[Editor’s Note: In his book “High Availability IT Services,” Dr. Terry Critchley lists
twenty-threeareas thatcan haveanimpactontheavailabilityof IT business services.
Inthis multipart series, and withhis permission, wepublish his observations. In Part1
of this series, we reviewed his first four reflections - his Parts A through D. In Part 2, we examined his
nextnineconsiderations–hispartsEthroughM.InthisPart3, wepublishhissix observationsN through
S]
Dr.TerryCritchley:MostofthedocumentationonHA/DRIhavecomeacrossmajorsonhardware,mainly
redundant or fault-tolerant, andtosomeextentsoftware.Mythesis is thatthespectrum of activityneeded
to design, implement and maintain a high availability business IT system and recover from failures small
and large(DR) is much,muchgreater.Below,I have listed 23areas (AtoW) thatcanhavean impacton
the availability of business services that are IT-based. I am sure it will be evident that these areas can
haveasignificantimpactontheavailabilityandnon-availabilityofanyserviceorsystem.
Remember,focusingonavailabilityandfocusingonavoidanceofnon-availabilityarenotthesamethingif
youthinkaboutit.
Thebookandchapterreferencesfollowingreferto'HighAvailabilityITServices':
https://www.crcpress.com/High-Availability-IT-Services/Critchley/9781482255904.
N. Availability by Partnerships
It is usually the case when systems experience faults or crash that there will be more than one vendor
who may need to help in problem determination and resolution. If these vendors do not cooperate, there
is often 'finger pointing' or 'not our product' activity. Cooperating vendors can aid in designing high
availability systems and reduce problem determination and recovery time in an installation. They should
alsobeonhandtoexpediterecoveryfromfailuresinvolvingtheirproducts.
It may also be beneficial to consult other organizations on IT matters like HA/DR where there is a
commoninterest(andnobusinesscompetition).
Thereissynergyandcrossfertilizationofideasinthis sortofcooperation,but yourcompanymayhaveto
initiateit.
1
©2017SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

O. Availability by Change Management1
‘Bank loses data’. This was all over the UK newspapers, radio and television in June 2012 when a
majorbank hadanoutagethatblockedupdates,transfersandwithdrawalsfrom thebank.Ittranspired
that there had been a scheduling software upgrade which resulted in the non-availability issue. The
outage, which had wide-ranging effects, lasted several days and, although the bank said it would
underwriteanyconsequentialloss,itwasacaseof‘eggallovertheirfaces’.
.. and lo and behold, there was another outage at the same bank in early March 2013, this time
attributed to hardware. Although the fix apparently took effect after 3 hours, there were ripple effects
onotherinstitutionsconnectedwiththebankaswellasthebankitself.
Of course, the hardware was probably fine in the first instance, but this was a typical ‘logical outage’ that
hardware at 99.999% availability would not have solved – only cost the customer a lot of money. As it
waslaterreported,the‘caper’costthebank£125mandanunknownamountincustomerdefections.
Change Management is mentioned elsewhere in this document, but suffice it to saythat one of the prime
considerations in changes is that they should be capable of being ‘backed out’ if they fail. This doesn't
mean that any outages caused by the original change will not be serious. 'Risk-laden' changes ought to
bepre-testedifpossible2.
Though it is known that a piece of scheduling software was involved, it is not known who 'goofed' - the
softwareoroperationsliveware.
P. Availability by Performance/Capacity Management
We have seen that performance issues can masquerade as outages when user work is seriously
interrupted or degraded by poor responses. These topics are covered in Chapter 7, but suffice it to say
whatthefundamentaldifferencesbetweenperformanceissuesandoutagesareasfollows.
Performance Management is a proactive operational exercise, mainlyconcerned with the 'here and now'
of resource consumption, response and turnaround times and the provision of data for Capacity
Management. On the other hand, Performance Monitoring is more of a passive exercise whereas
Capacity Management is the prediction of, and planning for, increased resource utilization in systems
withaviewtoproactivesolutions. Itistacticaland,insomecases,strategic.
Capacitymanagementhastwomajorlegs:
 The use of performance data and its intelligent extrapolation based on business volumes and
theirresourcerequirements.
 The estimation of resource requirements for new business applications and services, often using
operational data from similar workloads already running. It is important to understand the
difference between a business transaction and the subsequent multiple system transactions
whenassessingresourcerequirements.
The two disciplines, Performance and Capacity, should not be confused in their objectives, methodology,
conclusionsoroutput.Oneistacticalandoperational,theotherplanningandstrategic.
1 ExcellentdocumentandchecklistsetonChangeManagementat;http://www.cisco.com/warp/public/126/chmgmt.pdf
2 Amazonwebsite's'caper'inOctober2012
2
©2017SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Q. Availability by Monitoring
It is now fairly common to have a pseudo-client accessing services, such as web sites and business
applications. The 'client' acts as a real user submitting transactions or reading data from a live system. It
is plain to see that if this 'client' is to monitor availability as well as other items, it must survive outages of
the system being monitored. Common sense dictates that this 'client' be duplicated. For example, one
client should be located at the center and one located in an end user location or locations. A complete
center outage can be compensated for by the continuing activity of a remote 'client'. This could not
happenifacomponentanditsredundantcomponentaresidebysideinafloodedroom.
An adjunct to monitoring availability will be tools for measuring KPIs (key performance indicators), for
example, for Performance and Capacity Management. They will assist in situations where the users
considerasystem'down'basedonitsperformancecharacteristics.
SeeChapter7,alongside'SLAs,ManagementandMethods'.
R. Availability by Cleanliness
The machine room should resemble a hospital operating theatre (the better ones anyway) in its
cleanliness. Coffee, hamburgers and sundry other comestibles have no place in a machine room for fear
of contamination. I have seen a console keyboard ruined when coffee was spilt on it and the miscreant
tried to dry it with a hair dryer - the keyboard just buckled and died. The system it was controlling wasn't
pleased,andtheendusersdidn'tthinkmuchofiteither.Therewasnoduplicateconsolefacility.
Anything exposed that carries data, such as a tape reel, should not be handled with dirty hands. Another
possible gotcha can be introduced by extraneous electronic equipment in the machine room, since its
radiationscanbepickedupbythecircuitryinothersystems,possiblycausingbitstochangeatrandom.
S. Availability by Anticipation
Oneof thebenefits of experienceis thatapersoncanjudge whereproblemsmightariseandconcentrate
more effort in those areas. Where feasible, such experience ought to be enshrined in Operation
Runbooks so that less experienced personnel can learn. For example, if operations staff have found by
experience that when A happens, F and G are likely culprits and should be checked out first, it provides
valuable insight into problems and should be recorded in Operation Runbooks. This allows other less
experiencedoperatorstominimizeproblemdeterminationtimeandhencerecoverytime.
In the future, this might be done by software which is capable of learning and making judgements. In the
meantimethough,itisahuman'stasktolearnfromexperienceandpassthislearningon.
PredictiveMaintenance
Predictive maintenance, as the name implies, is the maintenance or replacement of parts of systems
based on certain criteria which might indicate imminent or near-future failure. The technique is very often
appliedtomechanicalsystems suchas oilrigs,large machines andsoon; but it is alittleharder tofitinto
an IT environment. It is still worth investigating for applicability to your IT environment, an example being
the detection, logging and analysis of 'soft' errors in system parts. An IBM Redbook gives an overview of
thetopicinthefirstchapterof:
http://www.redbooks.ibm.com/redpapers/pdfs/redp5035.pdf
ThereisalsoanAberdeenReport' AssetManagement:UsingAnalyticstoDrivePredictiveMaintenance.'
Although mainly applicable to manufacturing, this report has uses in 'telecoms and IT management',
accordingtothereportabstract:
3
©2017SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

http://aberdeen.com/Aberdeen-Library/8380/AI-predictive-asset-analytics.aspx.aspx

Itshouldnowbeglaringlyobviousthattherearemanybasestobecoveredinthesearchforhigh
availability,andIhaveoutlinedquiteafewhere.Youmaythinkofothers.Ifyoudo,elaborateonthem
andtellothers(notyourcompetitorsthough).
4
©2017SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com