On-Demand Software Utility Hits Availability Bump
October2007
Salesforce.com is a software on-demand utility providing Customer Relationship Management
software services to its customers. With data centers in many countries, it serves over 35,000
businesses worldwide. According to Gartner Group, it is one of two leaders in Sales Force
Automation.
Salesforce.com is a utility. Its users depend upon critical customer and sales data held by the
Salesforce.com data centers to run their daily businesses. As a utility, the Salesforce.com
servicesareexpectedtobealwaysavailable.
However, a year ago, Salesforce.com had several major outages over a period of a few months,
outagesthatlefttheircustomerslookingforotheralternativesandthatlefttheentirephilosophyof
softwareutilitiesinquestion.
What Do We Expect of a Software Utility
AsoftwareutilitysuchasSalesforce.comhostsanentirecustomerapplicationonitsservers.This
includes not only the application programs but also the customer’s entire database. Customers
paybyusageratherthanbyalicensefeeastheywouldwithacquiredsoftware.
Customers expect that their applications and data will always be available. Certainly, the
availability of these services should be much greater than that which could be achieved in the
customers’owndatacentersandatamuchreducedprice.
Availabilityofserviceiskeytoasuccessfulsoftwareutility.Afterall,from anavailabilityviewpoint,
a software utility is like a power utility or the telephone system. It is expected to be there
wheneverweneedit.
Salesforce.com
Salesforce.com (www.salesforce.com) was founded in 1999 by Marc Benioff, an executive out of
Oracle. Salesforce.com’s mission is to provide Customer Relationship Management (CRM)
services on an on-demand basis. It was a pioneer in providing software as a service rather than
as an application package to be run by the customer. Its CRM services include Sales, Service
and Support, Partner Relationship Management, Marketing, and Analytics. It also provides other
application services such as accounting and Human Resource Management (HRM) via
seamlesslyintegratedservicesfromitspartners.
Headquartered in San Francisco, Salesforce.com operates data centers in North America,
Europe, the Middle East, Africa, and Asia Pacific. Through what has been described as an
innovative business model and brilliant marketing, it has grown to over 35,000 customers,
including Chase Paymentech, Bear Stearns Asset Management, Daimler Chrysler Financial,
Avis,KaiserPermanente,andDowJonesNewswires.
1
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Salesforce.com has become a leader in the rapidly growing field of on-demand software to
manage customer data. Its goal as a software utilityis to provide critical CRM customer data and
applicationservicesatanytimetoitscustomers.
The Data Center Upgrade
Salesforce.com has been an Oracle user since its founding. By 2005, it had become an Oracle
RAC user, along with Oracle’s TimesTen memory-resident database. However, Salesforce.com
was pushing Oracle to its limits. Salesforce.com’s database measured in the multiterabytes, and
its systems supported over 350,000 users from 18,700 companies generating millions upon
millionsofqueries andtransactionsperday.ThoughothercompaniessuchasAmazonandeBay
were using larger databases, none of them faced the number of simultaneous users and the
transactionratesthatSalesforce.comfounditselfsupporting.
Therefore, Salesforce.com decided to upgrade to Oracle 10g. The installation of this database
wentliveinNovember,2005.
Salesforce.com had also announced a $50 million data center expansion in August of 2005.
Called“Mirrorforce,”theexpansionaddedanewdatacenterontheU.S.EastCoastandtwonew
data centers on the U.S. West Coast. These data centers were scheduled to go into operation
during the winter of 2006 and would act as mirrors of other data centers to provide rapid failover
intheeventofanoutage.Unfortunately,thisexpansionprovedtobetoolate.
Cutover Plagued By Problems
Salesforce.com almostimmediatelystartedto have problems withthenewdatabase.Oraclekept
crashing,andSalesforce.comstruggledtokeepservicesupandrunning.1
Then, on Tuesday morning, December 20, 2005, users started to receive an ominous message
whentheytriedtologon:
“The Salesforce.com servers are temporarily unable to respond to your request. We
apologizefortheinconvenience.
Thankyouforyourpatience,andpleasetryagaininafewmoments.”
Unfortunately, the minutes turned into several hours as the Salesforce.com services were out for
mostoftheday.TheoutageaffectedusersinNorthAmerica,Europe,andAsia/Pacific.
To add insult to injury, there was no communication from Salesforce.com to its customers
indicating the severity of the outage. Telephone calls went unanswered. It wasn’t until the
followingday,afterserviceswererestored,thatmanagementstartedapologizingtocustomers.
Customers were so angry that an active blog was set up. Entitled GripeForce, this blog aired
many complaints by Salesforce.com’s customers; and it was to remain active for several months
asSalesforce.comsufferedadditionaloutages.
OnThursday,January5,2006,Salesforce.comsufferedasmalleroutage.Thisonelastedfortwo
or three hours. In response to this outage, further poor communication from Salesforce.com
management, and the outrage expressed by customers through GripeForce and other blogs,
Salesforce.com added to their website asystem status page that wouldreflect thecurrentstatus
1
Information for this article was obtained from TheStreet.com, eWeek, InfoWorld, news.com, c/Net news, Business
Week,zdnet.com,accessmylibrary.comandbrucedaley.typepad.comfortheperiodfromDecember,2005,throughApril,
2006.
2
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

of the system. Initially, however, access to this status page was limited to only Salesforce.com’s
premiumcustomers.
Then another big one hit. On Monday, January 30, 2006, errors in the database cluster caused
the cluster to crash. Salesforce.com had to restart each database instance in the cluster, a
process thattook hours toperform.This outageaffectedmainlyusers intheU.S. andCanadafor
hours.
However, even with the previous experience with poor management communication, it took more
than a day for Salesforce.com to post a status update to its new system status page. To make
matters even worse, in an email to his customers, Salesforce.com’s CEO Marc Benioff called the
January 30th outage a “minor issue.” This sparked an outpouring of particular anguish on the
blogs. How could an outage that took down the daily operations of thousands of companies for
hoursbedeemeda“minorissue”?
In the following weeks, there were continuing intermittent outages, like aftershocks following a
major earthquake. On February 9, an outage occurred due to a failover fault. Another outage
occurredonFebruary16th.
Afterthat,operationsreturnedtonormal.Salesforce.comproudlyreportedthatinMarch,theyhad
achieved 99.7% availability. They had measured only 100 minutes of downtime in 36,000
minutes.
As impressive as this may sound, this amounts to two hours of downtime per month. Would you
likeyourtelephonetobedeadfortwohourseachmonth?Thisdoesnotseem tobeaparticularly
aggressivegoalforautilityofanykind.
The User Response
The user response to this level of availability performance and lack of communication was
understandably strident. The rapid emergence of blogs such as GripeForce was a testimony to
this.
In addition, competitors gleefully jumped on the bandwagon. Salesnet, a Salesforce.com
competitor, acquired a logon to the Salesforce.com services and monitored their availability. Any
glitchwasimmediatelyreportedtothepress.
A user-initiated survey (albeit of only sixteen customers) indicated that over 60% of customers
were considering other options. Whether Salesforce.com lost any significant business or any
largecustomersisaclosely-guardedcompanysecret.
Management’s Response
Following the second outage, management got the message about their poor communication
skillsandsetupthesystemstatuspageontheir website.However,this wasmadeavailableonly
topremium customers,apointsourlynotedontheblogs.Eventhen,ittook overadaytopostthe
statusofthethirdoutageonJanuary30th.
Since then, Salesforce.com has taken a major step in customer communications by establishing
a tracking facility available to its customers called “trust.Salesforce.com.” This facility shows the
current status of each server in the data centers, making such status clear via color coding. For
fulloperation,theserveris coloredgreen.Shouldaservergodownformorethantenminutes,its
colorischangedtoyellow.Afterthirtyminutesofoutage,itbecomesred.
3
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

However, management has still not set its sights very high for availability. In another email, Mr.
Benioff states that “outages and downtime are an unavoidable reality of computing.” He points to
statistics for the first seven years of operation showing an availability of three 9s. Wesubmit that
if this is a level of availability of which software utilities will be proud, that industry is not going to
grow very much. Availabilities of five 9s and beyond are achievable with today’s high availability
technologiesandareneededforanyservicetobeconsideredautility.
Oracle and Salesforce.com – Strange Bedfellows
Oracle and Salesforce.com have had an up-and-down relationship. Salesforce.com was started
in 1999 by Marc Benioff, a protégé of Larry Ellison. Ellison invested $1 million in the startup and
becamethecompany’sfirstChairmanoftheBoard.
Atthetime,Oraclehadastrongdatabase which Salesforce.com needed,but ithadnosignificant
strengthinCRM.If Salesforce.com couldbesuccessful,Oracle wouldgaina verylargecustomer
(andthis,infact,happened).
But Oracle then acquired PeopleSoft and Siebel. With the Siebel acquisition, Oracle suddenly
became the largest player in the CRM market in terms of both revenue and seats deployed. The
relationship between Oracle and Salesforce.com immediately changed as a result. Oracle and
Salesforce.com were now strong competitors and the dominant players in CRM. At OracleWorld
inSeptember,2005,Ellisonsaid,“WewanttogoafterSalesforce.comasmuchaswecan.I’man
investor,andIwanttoseemyinvestmentgotozero.”
Having said that, Oracle nevertheless pulled out all the stops when Salesforce.com began to
have outage problems. Though Oracle had the most to gain from a Salesforce.com failure, Larry
Ellison was on the phone personally with Marc Benioff and arranged the assignment of a whole
teamofOracle’sbestpeopletosolvetheoutageproblems.
Postscript
By late 2006, the new data centers went online. Things seem to have quieted down on the
Salesforce.com front. The blogs have gone silent, and Salesforce.com has been growing at a
50%annualrate.Theynowhaveover35,000customers.
Recently, Gartner Group has included Salesforce.com in its leaders’ quadrant of its Sales Force
Automation Magic Quadrant. Salesforce.com shares this prestigious position with only one other
product–Oracle’sSiebelCRM.
Lessons Learned
It seems that there is one lesson that must be learned repetitively, and that is good
communication with customers, especially during times of strife. In earlier Never Again articles,
we have seen this over and over (see our May, 2007, article – BlackBerry Gets Juiced and our
September, 2007, article – Hostway’s Web Hosting Service Goes Down for Days). Customers
willshowalotofpatience(andmaybeevensomesympathy)iftheyjustknowwhatisgoingon.
WefeelthatanotherlessonthatmaybelearnedbySalesforce.cominthefutureisthatthree9sis
simply not good enough for a software utility. When large systems today are routinely providing
four 9s of availability, and five 9s and beyond are achievable with clusters and active/active
architectures, users are not going to be willing to accept hours of downtime per year when they
know that they can get minutes or less of downtime per year. If Salesforce.com doesn’t provide
thislevelofavailability,youcanbesurethatacompetitorwill.
4
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
