Calculating Availability – Redundant Systems
October2006
Our logo expresses the basic availability equation for an active/active application
2
network in a somewhat stylized form (seeWhat’s That Nerd Logo?). But what is the
real relationship between the various subsystem factors and system availability?
Though the relationship can become quite complex when many factors are taken
intoaccount,theoverridingavailabilityequationisrelativelysimple.Itis1
A 1f(1a)s1
In this article, we will show the origin of this equation and what it means. The relationship also
leads to the concept of “9s” as a measure of availability as well as to some useful associated
rules.Wewillexplorethesetopicsaswell.
If youreyes glazeover atsomeofthealgebra,skipthebodyofthis articleandgorighttotheend
toreadthesimplebutimportantavailabilityrulesthatcomeoutoftheanalysis.
The Availability Relationship
To simplify things a bit, we will dive into this topic in small increments. First, we will look at a
simpletwo-nodesystem withonespare.Next, we will look ata multinodesystem with onespare.
Finally,wewilllookatamultinodesystemwithmultiplespares.
First,letusdefinethefollowingterms:
A istheprobabilitythatthesystemwillbeup(itsavailability).
F istheprobabilitythatthesystemwillbedown.
a istheavailabilityofanode.
n isthenumberofnodesinthesystem.
s isthenumberofsparenodesinthesystem.
f is the number of ways that all of the spares plus one other node
can fail (that is, the number of node failures that will cause the
systemtofail).
Clearly,A=1-F.
1AmoreextensivederivationoftheavailabilityequationmaybefoundinthebookentitledBreakingtheAvailability
Barrier:SurvivableSystemsforEnterpriseComputing,byDr.BillHighleyman,PaulJ.Holenstein,andDr.Bruce
Holenstein,publishedbyAuthorHouse;2004
©2006SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman 1

DualNode,SingleSpare
We first consider an active/active system with two nodes, only one of which need be operational
for the system to be considered available. The availability of a single node is a. This is the
probability that the node will be up. Therefore, the probability that it will be down is (1-a). The
probability that both nodes will be down is (1-a)2. This is the probability F for the failure of the
system:
F(1a)2
Thus,theavailabilityofthesystem,A,is
A 1F1(1a)2 Node1
For instance, if the node availability is .99, the probability that it will
be down is .01. The probability that both nodes will be down, thus Network
causing a system failure, is .012, or .0001. Thus, the system
availability is (1 – 0001), or .9999. The system has an availability of
four9s.
Node2
MultipleNodes,SingleSpare
DualNode,SingleSpare
In a multinode system with one spare, it will still take only the failure
of two nodes totakedown thesystem.However,there aremanyways that wecanhave afailure
of two nodes. For instance, if there are five nodes in the system, there are ten ways that two
nodescanfail(countthem).Thus,inthiscase,thenumberoffailuremodes,f,isten.
In general, if there are n nodes, there are n ways that
one node can fail. Given a single node failure, there are
Node2
(n-1) ways that a second node can fail. However, this
reasoning has counted each failure mode twice; e.g.,
Node3
node 2 followed by node 5 and node 5 followed by node
Node1 2. Therefore, for an n node system, the number of failure
Network modes,f,is
n(n1)
f 
2
Node4
Node5 The probability of failure of the system is the probability
thatanytwonodes willfailtimesthenumberof ways that
twonodescanfail:
Multinode,SingleSpare n(n1)
F (1a)2
2
Thus,theavailabilityofthesystemis
n(n1)
A 1F1 (1a)2
2
For instance, consider a five-node system. Using our previous example for nodes with an
availability of .99, the number of failure modes is ten; and the availabilityof a five-node system is
[1-10(.01)2],or.999.Thisisthree9sofavailability.
Note that this is less than the availabilityof four 9s for the two-node system. Here is an important
ruletonote:
©2006SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman 2

As an active/active application network gets larger with no increased sparing, its
availabilitygoesdown.Thisisbecauseoftheincreaseinthenumberoffailuremodes.
Wetalkaboutadditionallevelsofsparingnext.
MultipleNodes,MultipleSpares
Thenextsteptoconsider is theimpactof havingmorethan onespare.Wehavedefineds as the
number of spare nodes in the network. Therefore, it will take the loss of s+1 nodes to take down
thenetwork.
Since the probability of losing one node is (1-a), the
probability of losing s+1 nodes is (1-a)s+1. Note that if
there is a single spare (s = 1), this reduces to (1-a)2, as
Node2
usedaboveforasinglesparednetwork.
Node3
The next question is how many ways are there for s+1
Node1 nodes to fail? This is the number of failure modes, f, for
Network the network and is the number of ways that s+1 nodes
Node4 out of n nodes can fail. The number of such
combinationsisgivenbytheratherimposingexpression
Node6 n!
Node5 f 
(s1)!(ns1)!
Multinode,MultipleSpares The symbol “!” means “factorial.” For instance, 3! is
3x2x1=6.
Thus,theprobabilityoffailureforannnodesystemwithssparesis
F f(1a)s1
anditsavailabilityis
A 1f(1a)s1
where f is given above for n nodes and s spares. This is the relationship that we promised you at
thebeginningofthisarticle.
Asanexample,iftherearetwospares(s=2),thenumberoffailuremodes,f,becomes
n(n1)(n2) fortwospares.
f 
6
Consider a six-node system with two spares. That is, at least four nodes must be up and running
in order for the system to be operational. Then f = 20 (that’s right – there are twenty ways that
three nodes out of six can fail – count them). Using our example above of a nodal availability of
.99, the probability of failure of the system, F, is 20x(.01)3, or .00002. This yields a system
availability of .99998, or almost five 9s. This compares to the similar singly-spared system above
thathadanavailabilityofthree9s.
What About Those 9s?
The measure of 9s for availability is a logarithmic measure. It is like the Richter scale. An
earthquake of magnitude 6 is ten times more powerful than a magnitude 5 earthquake. Likewise,
©2006SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman 3

asystem withanavailabilityoffour9sistentimesmorereliablethanasystem withanavailability
ofthreenines.
Nowthere’saclue.Let’stakethelogarithm ofthefailureprobabilityofanactive/activesystem:
9slog (F)log [f(1a)s1]log (f)(s1)log (1a)
10 10 10 10
(WeneededtoaddtheminussignsinceA=1-F.)
Forinstance,consider afive-nodesystem (n=5) withonespare(s =1).Inthiscase,fis equalto
10. Log(f) is log(10), which is 1. Further, assuming that the nodal availability, a, is .99, log(1-a) =
log(.01),whichis-2.Thesystemavailabilitymeasuredin9sisthen-1+2X2,orthree9s(.999).
Notice that the log of the nodal failure probability, (1-a), is the measure of that node’s availability
in 9s. For instance, if the node has an availability of .01 = 10-2, the log of its availability is -2,
equivalenttotwoninesofavailability.
Noting that the log of the nodal availability is multiplied by (s+1), we come up with the following
importantrule:
Adding a spare node adds the number of nines associated with that node to the system
availabilitybutreducedbytheincreaseinfailuremodes.
That is, adding an additional spare node adds the number of 9s of that node to the system
availability – almost. This improvement in availability is reduced a bit by the increase in the
numberoffailuremodesinthesystem.Morenodesmeanmorefailuremodes.
Our Logo
2
Let us now return to our logo. It represents the failure probability of an
active/active system with one spare node – the most common of active/active
systems. The first “f” represents the number of failure modes – the number of
ways that two nodes can fail in the system. The second “f” represents the
probability of failure of any two nodes. Thus, the probability of failure of the
systemisff2(ifyouwillforgivethestylization).
Rules of Availability
Weleaveyouwiththefollowingrulesfortheavailabilityofanactive/activeapplicationnetwork:
1. Themorenodesinanactive/active network,thelessreliableitisforagivensparing
level.Thisisbecauseoftheincreaseinfailuremodes.
2. Adding a spare node to an active/active network adds the number of nines
associated with that node to the system availability – almost. The improved system
availabilityisreducedsomewhatbytheincreaseinfailuremodes.
As an example, using the relations we derived above, if the availability of a node is .99, the
availability of a two-node system in which only one node is required to be up (i.e., there is one
spare)is.9999,orfour9s.
If we add a third node to the system, maintaining still only one spare, the systems availability
dropsto.9994(alittleoverthree9s).
©2006SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman 4

If, however, that third node was an additional spare node, the system availability becomes
.999994(alittleoverfive9s).
Wehope that this leaves you with a feeling of the impact on active/active system availability as a
functionofsystemsizeanditssparinglevel.
©2006SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman 5
