Will You Have Internet Access After July 9, 2012?
May2012
The Mayan calendar predicts the end of the world on December 21, 2012. The FBI predicts that up to
300,000 people around the world – manyin the U.S. – will lose Internet service on July9, 2012. If one of
themisyou,theremaynotbemuchthatyoucandoaboutitexcepttorebuildyouroperatingsystem.
Howdidthishappen?AndwhyisJuly9ththemagicdate?
The DNSChanger Malware
The story begins with a well-known class of malware called “DNSChanger.” Simply put, DNSChanger
infects a PC and changes the IP address of the PC’s DNS (Domain Name System) server to a rogue
DNS server. It is the DNS server that converts a URL address of a web site (such as
www.availabilitydigest.com) to an IP address on the Internet so that the PC can interact with that web
site.Withoutaccess toaDNSserver,aPC browser has noconnectiontotheinternet.Theonlyresponse
itwillgettoaURLrequestis“pagenotfound.”
AvalidDNSserveristypicallyoperatedbyanISP(InternetServiceProvider).BychangingaPC’srouting
of URL requests to a rogue DNS server, a hacker can now reroute URLs to a fraudulent web server for
whatever purpose he wants. Users will think that they are accessing a valid web site, but in fact they will
be accessing a look-alike site that may behave quite differently. For example, if a user clicked on an
iTunesicon,hecouldbedivertedtoafraudulentsitethatpurportedtosellApple Products ortoasitethat
infectedthePCwithadditionalmalware.
The FBI Sting
Following a two-year investigation called “Operation Ghost Click,” an international consortium of law
enforcement agencies and private-sector partners uncovered a network of rogue DNS servers that were
being used in an advertising scam. Estimates are that the network had bilked users out of about $14
million in fraudulent product sales. The hackers were operating as a “legitimate” company under the
name“RoveDigital.”
The consortium was led by the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and included NASA’s Office of
Inspector General, the Estonian police and Border Guard Patrol, and the National High Tech Crime Unit
of the Dutch National Police Agency. In November, 2011, six Estonians were taken into custody by local
officials; and the police confiscated several rogue DNS servers located in Estonia, New York, and
Chicagothatwereusedinthescam.TheUnitedStatesispursuingextraditionofthesixhackers.
1
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

According to a study of IP addresses found in the rogue servers, the FBI estimated that the hackers had
infected almost four million computers in 100 countries with the DNSChanger malware. 500,000 of these
computerswereintheU.S.EvenNASAcomputerswerehacked.
The version of DNSChanger used by the criminal ring took advantage of a vulnerability in Microsoft
Windows. In addition to changing the DNS Server IP address in the infected PC, DNSChanger had
network capabilities. If the infected PC was on a small business or home office network, it would search
out other devices on the network and would infect them as well. If a router such as Linksys or Cisco was
used,DNSChangerhadtocapabilitytoinfecttherouterifitwasconfiguredwiththedefaultusernameand
password with which it was delivered. This particular version of DNSChanger also prevented updates to
antiviruspackagesandoperatingsystems.
TheFBIsetouttonotifyallinfectedusersandgivethemguidance(seelater)onwhattodotodisablethe
malware. By early April, many of the affected users had corrected the problem. However, about 300,000
usersmaystillbeunawarethattheyhavebeeninfected.Manyoftheseusers-85,000-areintheU.S.
Why July 9th?
Afterseizingtherogueservers,theFBIfacedadilemma.IfitsimplydisabledtherogueDNSservers,four
millionPCswouldsuddenlybeleftwithoutInternetaccess.
Instead,itcontractedwithInternetSystemsConsortiumtosetupandoperatelegitimateDNSserverswith
the fraudulent IP addresses to temporarilyreplace the rogue servers for infected users.The FBI provided
informationtoISPssothattheycouldredirecttheirusersbacktotheirownlegitimateDNSservers.
This move was court-approved, and the FBI was very careful not to give any appearance of government
interventionintheInternet.TheyhadnoaccesstoanydataconcerningInternetactivityofthevictims.
The problem was that the court approved this temporary fix only until July 9th, 2012. Users who have not
takencorrectiveactionbythenwilllosetheirInternetaccess.
What to Do?
For users to determine whether theyhave been infected and, if so, to understand what corrective actions
theyshouldtake,theFBIhasprovideddetailedinformationonitswebsiteatwww.fbi.gov.
In its document entitled DNSChanger Malware,1 the FBI gives a detailed description of DNSChanger and
methodsfordetectinganinfection.OnewayistodeterminetheIPaddressthataPC isusingtoaccessa
DNS server. This can be done on a Windows system by entering the command line ipconfig/all and
lookingfortheentrythatreadsDNSServers.ThiswillprovidetheIPaddressesusedbythePCtoaccess
DNS servers. If an address is any of the following, it is pointing to a rogue server and the computer has
beeninfected:
85.255.112.0 through 85.255.127.255
67.210.0.0 through 67.210.15.255
93.188.160.0 through 93.188.167.255
77.67.83.0 through 77.67.83.255
213.109.64.0 through 213.109.79.255
64.128.176.0 through 64,128.191.255
The referenced document also shows ways to obtain the DNS server addresses for both Windows XP
andApplecomputerswithoutusingthecommandline.
1DNSMalware:IsYourComputerInfected?,FBI;November2011.
http://www.fbi.gov/news/stories/2011/november/malware_110911/DNS-changer-malware.pdf
2
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Checking wireless routers such as those provided by Linksys and Cisco are model-specific. The
manufacturershouldbecontactedtodeterminetheprocedurestodetectinfection.
To make detection even simpler, an industry-wide team has developed easy-to-use web sites for
determining infection byDNSChanger.Multiple languages aresupported, and thereare one or moreweb
sites for each supported language. These web sites are accessed via the URL www.dns-ok.<country>,
where<country>is acountrycode.For instance,anEnglish websiteis foundat www.dns-ok.us.Country
codesare:
Language <country>
English us
German de
Finish,Swedish,English fiorax
Dutch,French be
French fr
English,French ca
English lu
English,Dutch nl
English gov.au
German,French,andEnglishversionsmayalsobefoundatwww.dnschanger.eu.
For instance, accessing the .us web site gives an instant indication.2 A green
symbolmeansthatthecomputerisnotinfected;aredsymboldenotesinfection.
Another site that provides information on detection and correction is managed by
the FBI security partner DCWG (DNSChanger Working Group), which includes
subject matter experts from many organizations. Its web site can be found at
http://www.dcwg.org/.
Unfortunately, there is no patch or fix at this time to remove the infection (though the DCWG web site
gives some hints). If a computer is found to be infected, a computer professional or the user’s service
provider should be consulted. Alternatively, the restore procedures initially packaged with the computer
canbeutilized.
Summary
Following the successful sting operation, the FBI Assistant Director in Charge of Operation Ghost Click,
JaniceFedarcyk,summarizedtheoperationsuccinctly:
“Today, with the flip of a switch, the FBI and our partners dismantled the Rove criminal enterprise.
Thanks to the collective effort across the U.S. and in Estonia, six leaders of the criminal enterprise
havebeenarrestedandnumerousservers operatedbythecriminalorganization havebeendisabled.
Additionally, thanks to a coordinated effort of trusted industry partners, a mitigation plan commenced
today, beginning with the replacement of rogue DNS servers with clean DNS servers to keepmillions
online,whileprovidingISPstheopportunitytocoordinateuserremediationefforts.”
The world economyis truly globalized. Byidentifying subjects in Estonia who caused a server in Chicago
todirectauserinGermanytoafraudulentwebsiteinCalifornia,theFBIhasproventhatobservation.
2Caution–Thewebsitedoesnotaskwhetheryouwantittocheckyourcomputer.Itjustdoesitanddisplaysthegreenorredresult
icon.
3
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

References
DNSMalware:IsYourComputerInfected?,FBI;November2011.
DNSChangerMalware,FBIWhitePaper
InfectedPCsmayloseInternetinJuly,USAToday;April21,2012.
4
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com