Military GPS Disabled by Upgrade
June2010
The U.S. Air Force is deploying a new GPS satellite system to replace the aging system now in
service. In anticipation of this deployment, the Air Force upgraded the software in its GPS
ground-control systems in early 2010 to be able to handle signals not only from the current GPS
satellites but also from the new satellites. The software in the 800,000 military GPS receivers
currentlyinservicewerealsoupgradedtobecompatiblewithbothsatellitesystems.
Toeveryone’sdismay,whenthenewground-controlsystemswerebroughtintooperation,10,000
of the Air Force’s GPS receivers wouldn’t work. The systems they supported were effectively
down. It took two weeks to come up with a temporary fix and months to test and deploy a
permanentfix.
The capabilities of GPS have become a backbone technology for the U.S. military. How could
suchacriticalsystemfailsomiserably?
The Global Positioning System (GPS)
The Global Positioning System (GPS) is a space-based global navigation system. Multiple
satellitesorbitEarthinnear-earthorbit(about12,710milesup)everytwelvehours.
Each satellite carries an extremely accurate clock and transmits its current clock time to Earth.
Ground-based receivers receive signals from the satellites that are in their lines of sight. A
receiver measures the difference between the clock time in the transmitted message and its own
internal clock to calculate the distance that each satellite is from the receiver. By receiving the
signals from multiple satellites, a receiver can triangulate and determine its longitude, latitude,
andaltitude.
TheCurrentSystem–GPSIIA
The development of GPS began in the 1970s as a military project, driven by the race with the
Soviet Union for technological supremacy. The first GPS system was deployed in 1973 and has
beenreplacedwithnewsatellitetechnologyovertheyears.
The satellites for the current GPS system, GPS IIA, were launched between 1990 and 1997.
Theyprovide twoservices –Standard Positioning Service for civilian use and Precise Positioning
Service for military use. Though the civilian service provides accuracies within a few tens of
meters, military service provides an order-of-magnitude greater accuracy. In addition, it is said
that the military can reduce the accuracy of civilian usage if it is expected that civilian GPS
serviceswillbeusedmaliciously.
ThoughtheGPSIIAsatelliteshaveadesignlifeofsevenandahalf years,elevenofthesatellites
are still in operation after almost two decades and provide the GPS services we enjoy today.
However,thesesatellitesarepasttheirendoflifeandneedreplacing.
1
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

TheNewSystem–GPSIIF
Built by Boeing, the new GPS IIF satellite system currently being deployed incorporates many
advancesoverGPSIIA:
 Ithasadesignlifeoftwelveyears.
 Ithasamoreaccurateclock.
 Itspositionalaccuracyisdoubled.
 Ithasfasterprocessorswithmorememory.
 Itismoreabletoresistjamming.
GPS IIF will comprise twelve satellites. The first GPS IIF satellite
wasliftedintoorbitbyaDelta4rocketonMay28,2010. Artist’sConceptionofGPSIIF
Satellite
CommandandControl
TheGPSsystem isdeveloped,maintained,andoperatedbytheU.S.AirForce.Thesatellitesare
monitored and controlled by Air Space Command units at Schriever Air Force Base in Colorado
andbyabackupcontrolcenteratVandenbergAirForceBaseinCalifornia.
The Military Importance of GPS
GPS has found wide use in both civilian and military circles. Civilian uses range from car
navigationandcell-phoneE911servicestotrekkinggamessuchasgeocaching.1
GPS usage by the military is far more widespread. The military uses GPS for air and sea
navigation, bomb and artillery guidance, and armored vehicle and troop tracking. Because GPS
makes weapons more accurate, the military needs fewer warheads and fewer personnel.
However,theleanerGPS-dependentmilitarybecomesmorevulnerableifGPSservicesarelost.
This raises concerns that an attack on GPS could wreck havoc not onlyon the civilian population
but also on the military’s capabilities as well. The Air Force says that to date there has never
beenabreachoftheGPSsystem.Withsatellites12,000mileshighinthesky,theyaresafefrom
attack (at least, with today’s technology). The GPS command center is backed up with a
command center hundreds of miles away, both at heavily secured Air Force bases. GPS
communicationsisheavilyencrypted.
During the U.S. invasion of Iraq, the Iraqis tried to jam GPS signals. However, this took so much
power that the positions of the jamming stations were easily pinpointed; and they were taken out
byGPS-guided bombs. It is felt that jamming is beyond the capabilities of groups like the Taliban
andmanythird-worldcountries.However,jammingbyamajorfoeisaconcern.
The military use of GPS is not foolproof. There is still a human element. In 2001, a GPS-guided
bomb dropped by a Navy F-18 fighter jet fell into a residential neighborhood in Kabul,
Afghanistan. Four civilians were killed. A subsequent investigation determined that wrong
coordinateshadbeenenteredintotheguidancesystem.
The Botched GPS Upgrade
With such a heavy dependence by the military on GPS, it is incumbent upon the Air Force to
ensure that any modification to the GPS system, whether it is being made to the satellites, the
1Geocachingisahigh-techtreasurehuntinggameplayedthroughouttheworldbyadventureseekersequippedwithGPS
hand-helddevices.Seehttp://www.geocaching.com.
2
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

ground-control stations, or the GPS receivers, is fullytested before being commissioned. But this
didn’thappenwhenmodificationstoaccommodatethenewGPSIIFweremade.
Trimble Militaryand Advanced Systems of Sunnyvale, California, a division of Trimble Navigation
Limited, was given the contract to modify the GPS receiver software to be compatible with the
signals from both GPS IIA and GPS IIF. According to a Trimble spokesperson, the new receiver
software was thoroughly tested according to the Air Force test specifications provided by the Air
Force’sGPSWing.
Trimble’s new software was installed on the 800,000 militaryGPS receivers worldwide. However,
when the new software was put into service in the ground-control stations on January 11, 2010,
reports started pouring in that receivers could no longer acquire the satellite signals. As manyas
10,000 receivers were inoperable. Civilian receivers, which use different signals, were not
affected.
The Air Force’s GPS Wing immediately assembled a User Equipment Crises Action Team that
contactedmilitaryusersaroundtheworld,includingactivecombatteamsinIraqandAfghanistan,
to determine who had inoperable receivers and what types they were. Theysoon discovered that
theproblemswerelimitedtotwoversionsofSelectiveAvailabilityAnti-SpoofingModule(SAASM)
receivers. It turned out that the receivers were unable to authenticate the new message format
implementedaspartoftheGPSIIFupgrade.
It took two weeks for Trimble to come up with a temporaryfix and several months to design, test,
anddistributeapermanentfix.
A subsequent investigation found that though the Air Force had performed extensive testing on
the new receiver software, it had never tested the upgrade on the SAASM receivers. The reason
was quite simple – they had no such receivers available to them for testing. As a consequence,
the Air Force is now acquiring a broad cross-section of all military and civilian receiver models
andisdevelopinglongerandmorethoroughtestsformilitaryreceivers.
All of this was not known to the general public until
April 30th when the Air Force disclosed the problem
on the Federal Business Opportunities web site. The
Air Force would not comment on how many systems
were affected, but it did acknowledge that operations
werehaltedfor awhileon onedevelopmentprogram.
This program was the development of the X-47B jet-
powered,carrier-baseddroneaircraft.
Lessons Learned
X-47BDrone
Onelessontobelearnedfrom thisexperienceisobvious.Takeashortcutintesting,andthearea
nottestedisboundtobiteyou.
Another lesson is fallback. Always have a fallback plan so that you can return quickly to the
known good system if the upgraded system performs improperly. When reports of GPS receiver
failures started pouring in, why didn’t the Air Force reinstall the original software and return to
normaloperationwhiletheproblemwasbeingdiagnosedandcorrected?
Fortunately, in this case, no serious harm was done. But what if this had happened in a
widespreadconflict?Howmanycriticalsystemsactivelyengagedincombatwouldhavesuddenly
failed? What bombs would have fallen on civilian populations? What troops on the ground would
besuddenlylost?Whatflightswouldnothavefoundtheirdestinations?
3
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Talkaboutsafety-criticalsystems.Letushopethatwewillneverhavetoanswersuchquestions.
Acknowledgements
Our thanks to Availability Digest subscriber, Ken Schroer, for bringing this story to our attention.
Materialforthisarticlewastakenfromthefollowingsources:
AirForceWorkingThroughGPSReceiverProblems,SpaceNews;May7,2010.
AirForce:TroubledGPSreceivernottested,AirForceTimes;May17,2010.
Air Force:TroubledmilitaryGPSreceiver wasn’ttestedbeforechange incontrol system,Science
News;May18,2010.
Report:GPSGlitchCrippledScoresofMilitaryDevices,AOLNews;June1,2010.
SoftwareSNAFUtookout10,000militarygeolocators,TheRegister;June2,2010.
GPSformilitarywentdown,NaviGadget;June4,2010.
GlitchshowshowmuchUSmilitaryreliesonGPS,AssociatedPress.
4
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com