This data can be gathered via questionnaires, one-on-one interviews, or group sessions.
Someone from each business function within each department should participate. Include both
4
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

business and IT staff. Focus on process, not procedures. The BIA is concerned with what each
departmentdoes,nothowitdoesit.
ImpactAssessment
Assess the impact to the organization when each process is interrupted and how the cost of the
disruption may escalate with time. Focus on the impact of a disruption, not its cause. Impact
scenariosarelikelytobelossordenialofphysicalaccess,failedtechnology,orboth.
Impactconsequencesinclude:
 Financial-lostrevenueandrecoverycosts.
 Operational – the ability to carry out functions based on available resources and
interprocessdependencies.
 LegalandRegulatory–prosecutions,fines,andlawsuitsasaresultoffailedprocesses.
 Customers–customerdefection,SLAs.
 Reputation–goodwill,brandloyalty,andstockvalue.
RecoveryRequirements
The recovery objectives include RTO, the maximum allowable time to recover, and RPO, the
maximum allowable data loss. Consider scenarios in which partial recoveryof business functions
is acceptable and buys time, thus freeing recoveryresources for other recoveryefforts. Note that
RTOsandRPOsmayvarywiththeseason.
Anotherimportantclassofrecoveryrequirementsistheresources–technology,people,supplies,
vendors–thatmustbeinplacetorestoreeachprocess.
TheBIAMatrix
TheresultsoftheBIAdatagatheringcanbesummarizedformanagementreview.TheBIAmatrix
shouldincludethefollowinginformationforeachbusinessfunction:
 Businessfunctionnameanddescription.
 Outageduration.
 Financial,operational,regulatory/legal,customer,andreputationimpact.
 Dependencies.
 RTOandRPOestablishedbybusinessunit.
 Technologytobeused.
 CantheRTOandRPObemet?
Part 3: Think it Through: Effective strategy, development & documentation
Once the Risk Analysis and the Business Impact Analysis have been completed, the full
recoveryplan can be prepared. The firststep is to compare the organization’s IT capabilities with
the requirements of the business units. Recovery strategies can be categorized and may range
from High Availability (hot offsite servers) to Continuous Data Protection (offsite backups with
journals), remote disk backups, and remote tape backups. The higher the level of protection, the
more expensive is the solution. Each business process is mapped into the least expensive
recoverycapabilitythatprovidestheRTOandRPOneeded.
Recovery procedures should begin with manual procedures for carrying on business as full
recovery efforts are under way. The next step is to restore the organization’s technological
5
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

capabilities. This may require moving employees to an alternate site if the first site has been
renderednonoperational.
Staff issues must also be planned. This includes medical treatment as a result of the incident,
notification of familymembers in the event of death, evacuation plans that include accounting for
personnel, relocation of staff to an alternate site (travel, housing, and expenses), daycare
servicesforchildrenofdisplacedstaff,andcontinuationofpayroll.
A crisis communication plan must be established to allow the coordination of recovery efforts.
Mass notification and response products are available to help fulfill this need. Communications
must also be maintained with vendors, relatives of employees, local public safety agencies,
regulatoryagencies,thefinancialmarkets,andthepress.
It is important to document all actions taken in response to the incident and as recovery
progresses. This can help safeguard the company and its management in the event of a
regulatoryauditorlitigation.
Theresultingplanshouldinclude:
 Conditionsunderwhichtheplanshouldbeactivated.
 Theinitialresponsetothedisruption:
o Emergencyassessment.
o Evacuationprocedures.
o Emergencymedicalresponse.
 Therecoveryteamstructureanditscommandandcontrol.
 Crisiscommunications.
 Recoveryprocedures:
o Notificationofstaff,stakeholders,vendors,authorities.
o Facilities,equipment,andsuppliesneeded.
o Restorationofdata-processingcapabilities.
o Restorationofdatanetworks.
o Publicrelations.
 Whattodoafterrecovery.
 Salvageoperations.
 Plandistribution.
 Planmaintenanceandversioncontrol.
 Plantesting.
The resulting plan should be reviewed and approved by the department managers. It should be
immediately available in the event of an emergency. One suggestion is to distribute it to the
requiredpersonnelonUSBkey-chainthumbdrives.
Part 4: Your BC Toolkit: Options and integration
Business continuity planning is an ongoing process. As the company evolves, so must the plan.
There are a variety of tools available to help with plan development and execution. The tools do
not drive the plan. Rather, they aid in the various activities involved with planning and execution.
Sometoolsarehostedasanoutsideservice,andothersareavailableforin-houseuse.
Tools can be categorized into two categories – preparatory tools and event-management tools.
Preparatory tools provide planning templates, document control, and version control. Event
managementtoolsareavailabletoaidinincidentresponseandrecoveryeffortsincludingincident
management, command-center management, notification, crisis management, communication,
andauditing.
6
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Factorstoconsiderwhenchoosingatoolinclude:
 Security – does the tool fit within the security requirements of the organization (for
instance,cantheplanbehostedonanoffsiteservice)?.
 Isthetoolproviderfinanciallysound?
 If the plan data is stored offsite, can it be moved to another service or to an in-house
tool?
 Iftheplanisstoredoffsite,isthebackupplanofthetoolvendorsufficient?
 Isthetoolcompatiblewiththecompany’sITinfrastructure?
 Dothecontracttermslockthecompanyinforanunacceptableduration?
 Whoownstheplandata?
 Does the tool vendor have the appropriate certification (for instance, SAS 70 for financial
institutions)?
Inaddition,therearemanycertifiedconsultantsavailabletohelpwiththecreationoftheplanand
withthechoiceoftoolsforplanpreparation,incidentmanagement,andrecovery.
Part 5: The Final Countdown: Rollout, testing, and results
Abusinesscontinuityplanisnogoodifitdoesn’tworkwhenneeded.Therefore,itisimperativeto
test the plan. Testing is not a one-time effort. As the company evolves, things change. The BC
plan must be continually updated and expanded to reflect the changes. It is also modified in
responsetoauditrecommendationsandtotheresultsofpriortesting.
It is important to periodically test the plan to continually ensure that it is workable. The BC plan
test is not a pass/fail test. Rather, it is a mechanism for discovering faults in the plan and for
improving it. It is the procedure that ensures that the plan is kept current. It is also an important
toolfortrainingstaffinthedocumentedresponseandrecoveryprocedures.
Business-recovery testing can be expensive. Staff must devote perhaps days to a full-blown test.
Additional resources must be obtained or commandeered from operational systems. The
company’soperationsmaybeimpactedduringthetest.Vendoractivitiesmustbecoordinated.
Consequently, the author suggests a layered approach to testing, starting with nonintrusive tests
andprogressingtoless-frequentfulltests.
 ChecklistTest
This test is a tabletop drill. The recovery team meets to determine whether the plan is
current, whether adequate supplies and equipment are available at the backup site,
whether telephone numbers are current, and whether everyone has access to the most
currentplandocumentation.
 StructuredWalk-ThroughTest
This test is typically carried out on a departmental basis. It involves a detailed walk-
throughof theprocedures calledfor intheplan byeachteam member.Duringthis test,a
disaster scenario is specified; and team participants describe or act out their responses
asdictatedbytheplan.Normaloperationsarenotaffected.
7
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

 EmergencyEvacuationDrill
The facility evacuation plan is exercised with all company personnel to ensure that they
know the exit routes, the procedures for handling personnel with physical limitations, the
assemblylocations,andtheverificationprocedures.
 RecoverySimulation
Recoverysimulation is the most extensive, expensive, and disruptive testing but also the
most important. It requires the greatest amount of planning and may entail some risk to
current business operations. In response to a specified disaster, recovery teams use
equipment, supplies, and facilities as they would during an actual disaster to carry out
recovery and restoration of company operations. A set of actors may be used to provide
asenseofrealitytothesimulatedincident.
The scope of each type of test and the responsibilities of the recovery team personnel for each
test are detailed by the author. These tests should be scheduled well in advance according to a
time schedule. The simpler tests should be scheduled more frequently, with the more complex
testsscheduledfrequentlyenoughtoensuretheviabilityofthelivingBCplan.
Summary
Some sort of business interruption is bound to affect every company, ranging from simple server
failures to a data-site disaster. Without proper planning, even simple failures can cause serious
disruptionstoacompany’soperations.
Aproperlydevelopedandtestedbusiness-continuityplancangoalongwaytowardmitigatingthe
impact of a disruptive event. It could even save the company from the ultimate disaster - its
demise.
8
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com
