Verizon 4G Network Down for Two Days
June2011
In December, 2010, Verizon Wireless inaugurated its much-touted 4G wireless service, beating
AT&T and other providers to be the first major wireless carrier in the U.S. to introduce a 4G
network.
Verizon’s4Gservicestartedwithabang.BytheendofApril,2011,ithadsoldover250,000ofits
first4G smartphones,the HTCThunderbolt, which runs ontheAndroid2.2operatingsystem.By
thistime,Verizonhad4Gservices in39cities;anditannouncedthat4G wouldbeavailablein59
othercitiesbytheendof2011.Itplanstoupgradeitsentire3Gnetworkbytheendof2013.
Happy customers raved about the significantly increased speeds of download and upload.
Verizonbraggedaboutits“alwaysreliable”network.
Thendisasterstruck.Verizon’srevered4Gnetworkwentdownforalmosttwodays.
Almost 4G
Before we get into what happened, let’s review what 4G is. Simply put, it is the fourth-generation
wireless network.Abouteverydecade, wireless technologyis upgradedtoanew generation.The
1G network was introduced in 1981 and used analog transmission of signals. The 2G network
followed in 1992 and replaced analog transmission with much improved digital transmission.
Wireless technology was improved bymoving to spread-spectrum communication in 2001, giving
risetoourcurrent3Gnetworks.
The next generation 4G network specifications are now nearing completion. The 4G network will
use true IPv6 packet-switching technology. It will provide secure, IP-based mobile broadband
communicationservicesforlaptops,smartphones,andothermobiledevices.
But true 4G networks, complying with the new 4G specifications, are not yet here. The 4G
specifications call for transmission rates of 100 megabits/sec. for high-mobility users (those in
cars or trains, for instance) and for one gigabit/sec. transmission rates for low-mobility users,
such as pedestrians or stationary users. But today’s “4G” networks can handle onlytransmission
ratesintheorderoftentotwentymegabits/sec.
To accommodate the transition, a Long Term Evolution (LTE) specification lays out the path from
3G to 4G. The industry has agreed that a service can be called “4G” if it is packet-based and if it
provides a substantial level of improvement in performance and function over the initial 3G
systems.
1
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Therefore, LTE networks are an important precursor to full 4G networks. One might more
accuratelythinkoftoday’s4Gservicesas“3.9G”services.Thebestisyettocome.
LTE Advanced, the advanced form of LTE,maps theevolution path to full 4G. An LTE Advanced
compliantnetworkisindeed4G.
4G networks are not backwards compatible with 3G networks since they use different
technologies. However, LTE Advanced networks, when theycome, will be backwards compatible
withtoday’sLTEnetworks.
The Outage
About 1 AM on Wednesday, April 27, 2011, people started to complain on their blogs and on
Twitter that they were not getting Verizon 4G service. Even worse, they were not being reverted
to 3G service, which is supposed to back up the 4G network (though 3G and 4G are not
compatibletechnologies,theVerizonphonescanrevertto3Gifneeded).
This came at an embarrassing time for one key Verizon executive. Just two days prior, Verizon
VP Nicola Palmer told mobile executives, “Frankly, I expected some speed bumps [in the launch
of 4G]. The surprise to me is that the speed bumps were very few and far between, and they
didn’t do any damage to the undercarriage.” Forty-eight hours later, the undercarriage took a
terribleblow.
In a 1:30 PM statement on the day of the failure, Verizon said that it was aware of the 3G, 4G,
and LTE network problems. It said that it had identified the cause of the outage and was working
to fix the issue. It said that customers should be able make calls from 4G phones, but data
downloadsmightbeveryslowornotevenpossible.Infact,4Gcustomerswerebeingservicedby
theold,slow1XRRTnetwork.
Furthermore, customers wouldn’t be able to activate new LTE devices until the failure was
resolved.
Verizon made no comment on the cause of the outage or its estimate of service restoration.
Finally,lateThursdayafternoon–almosttwodays later–servicewasrestoredtomostbutnotall
cities.
What Happened?
On the day that service was restored, one industry analyst, Simon Leopold, suggested that the
outage was caused by a Nokia Siemens Networks (NSN) element in the IMS (IP Multimedia
Subsystem).TheIMSforms thecoreof the4G network.Leopold’s suspected network culpritwas
theHSS,orHomeSubscriberServicesystem.
The HSS is the system that manages subscriber activity on the network. It holds all of the user
information related to preferences, subscriptions, location, and authorization so that users can be
managed by the network as they move around in the 4G network. Without an operating HSS,
users cannot be authenticated by the network and therefore are not able to connect to the
network.
The HSS is similar in function to the Home Location Register (HLR) found in 3G networks.There
have been numerous 3G network outages due to HLR failures, many of them being HLRs
suppliedbyNSN.
Verizon made no comment with respect to Mr. Leopold’s supposition. However, almost a month
later, on May 19th, Verizon’s CTO, Tony Melone, issued a fairly detailed statement describing to
2
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

some extent the source of the outage. He confirmed that a software problem within the network
core, IMS, shut down Verizon’s mobile 4G broadband network. The software problem rapidly
escalated and affected the core’s backup systems, eventually shutting down access to the entire
network.
The network is implemented so that when customers move out of 4G coverage, they move into
the 3G network but are still handled by the 4G core (by IMS and the HSS). But when IMS went
down, customers could not be connected to the 3G network even though it was operating
properly. This is the reason for the many user complaints that 3G access was unavailable when
theylostaccessto4G.
According to Mr. Melone, the problem was detected quickly; and a fix was rapidly determined.
However, Verizon elected to bring the network back up slowly to ensure that there would be no
furtherproblems.
Mr. Melone specified neither the network element nor the vendor. Verizon uses equipment from
multiple vendors in its 4G core. Predominant among them are Alcatel-Lucent and NSN. The
analyst,Mr.Leopold,perhapshitthenailonthehead.Atleast,hecameprettyclose.
Summary
Verizonmadethemistakethatsomanyserviceprovidersmakewhentheyhave anoutage.They
become unapproachable. Verizon shared precious little information about its efforts to restore its
nationwide service. There was nothing posted to its web site. There were no press releases or
even information given to the press. Google searches on the outage only found blog complaints.
The only information came over Verizon’s Twitter feed when the outage first occurred and later
whenservicewasrestored.
This lack of forthcoming information only blackened Verizon’s black eye further. Many other
companies have learned the lesson of crisis communication the hard way and have set up digital
dashboards that maintain a current status of all of their services. This is an avenue that Verizon
shouldperhapsaggressivelypursue.
AT&T and T-Mobile (which recently was acquired by AT&T) will roll out their LTE networks soon.
It is inevitable that they will suffer occasional outages in their 4G networks. Let us see how they
communicatetheoutagestatustotheircustomers.
Acknowledgements
Our thanks to our subscriber, Tom Kondo, for pointing us to most of the information for this
article.Thematerialforthearticlecamefromthefollowingsources:
4G,Wikipedia.
3GPPLongTermEvolution,Wikipedia.
LTEAdvanced,Wikipedia.
LongTermEvolution(LTE),LightReading;April27,2009.
Breakingdowncarriers’‘4G’wirelessspin,NetworkWorld;March15,2011.
Verizon Grappling with Major 4G LTE Outage as Exec’s Words Come Back to Bite Her, All
Things;April27,2011.
Verizonacknowledges4Goutage,Computerworld;April27,2011.
VerizonExperiences3G,4GLTENetworkOutage(Update2),PCMagazine;April27,2011.
VerizonInvestigatingLTEOutage,LightReadingMobile;April27,2011.
Verizon’s 4G Outage Resolved in NY but Delays Launch of Second 4G Phone, 4G Wireless
Evolution;April28,2011.
AnalystFingersNSNServerforVerizon’s4GFail,LightReadingMobile;April28,2011.
3
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

VerizonWireless4GReturnstoLife,butCustomerTrustStillBroken,eWeek;April30,2011.
IMSsoftwarebugcausedVerizonLTEoutage,ConnectedPlanetOnline;May19,2011.
4
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com