Unintended Acceleration and EMI
April2010
Doestheabsenceofadetectablefaultprovetheabsenceofadesigndefect?
Is electromagnetic interference (EMI) with automobile engine computers the cause of so many
sudden, unintended acceleration (SUA) incidents? That is the controversy now raging in the
public domain as auto manufacturers scramble to reassure nervous customers about the safety
of their vehicles. The engine computers (electronic control units, or ECUs) control throttle
settings, fuel/air mixture ratios, and transmissions in order to satisfy increasingly stringent fuel
economy and emission standards. Sometimes, unfortunately, these computers misbehave.
Whenthathappens,thecomputersoftenleavenoevidencetrail. HowcananECUdesigndefect
becorrectedifyoucan’tdetectthefault?
Manufacturers (most recentlyToyota) claim that their automobiles undergo extensive EMI testing
that has demonstrated no link between SUA and EMI. Critics, including engineering
professionals, counter that the tests have not been comprehensive enough. Judges and juries
have consistently rejected attempts to link SUA with EMI, ruling that the hypothesis is
scientificallyunreliable.
Yet SUA incidents have surged since the widespread introduction of ECUs in automobiles a
decade ago. In March, the Los Angeles times reported 102 deaths attributed to Toyota SUA
incidents.SUAisclearlyaseriousproblem,nomatterthecause.Sowhatisthesolution?
Is EMI the Culprit?
Unfortunately, we may never know. If radiation were to affect a computer, the effect would be
transientandwouldleavenofootprints.Butwouldn’texhaustivetestingshowtheproblem?
HowShouldWeTestEMISusceptibility?
Let’s put some numbers on realistic testing. Let us assume that the average car over the last
decade has been driven for 100,000 miles (some cars are new with lower mileage while others
are older with higher mileage). The eight million cars that Toyota recentlyrecalled have therefore
loggedabout800billionmiles.
Industry analysts have estimated that there have been about 10,000 reports of SUA incidents.
Assuming that these are all Toyota-related (which they are not), this means that an SUA incident
occurs every 80 million miles of driving, on the average. To do enough testing to have a hope of
causing just one SUA incident will require driving 800 cars in an EMI-intensive environment for
100,000mileseach.Thisisclearlynotfeasible.
And what is an EMI-intensive environment? EMI covers a broad range of frequencies from AM
radio stations to microwave towers. There have been many suggestions on the source of
radiation, assuming that it is a problem. What is agreed is that the EMI source must be pretty
1
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

strong because the ECUs, their wiring, and their transponders are purportedly well-shielded to
preventEMIproblems.
PossibleSourcesofEMI
However, EMI theories abound. Following are some of the suggested EMI sources that could
impactacar’sECU.
TheCar
Some point out that the automobile itself is a major source of EMI. Significant EMI is generated
whenever a current in the local wiring of the automobile suddenly changes. This can happen for
instance, whenever headlights or brake lights turn on or off. Have you ever been bothered by
excessivenoiseinyourcarradiobecauseoffaultyspark-plugwiring?ThisisanexampleofEMI.
PowerTransmissionLines
CNN recently reported a study investigating the potential link between high-voltage overhead
power lines andSUAincidents.Thestudyplottedthelocationof SUAincidentreports againstthe
power-grid topology. The report found that an alarming number of SUA incidents – about 39% -
occurred in the densest areas of transmission lines, even though these concentrations were well
outside of highly-populated and well-traveled areas. Furthermore, the study found many SUA
incidents appeared to happen just after a car passed under the power lines (but it was not
reportedwhetherthiswasstatisticallysignificant).
CarWashes
Another suspected source of EMI, interestingly, is car washes. It seems that a disproportionate
number of SUA incidents have happened in car washes. Car-wash operators have complained
about this for years. The thought is that moisture gets on the wiring and acts as a conductor for
EMI.
MobileElectronics
The airlines have been plagued by EMI.When cell phones, laptops, and other electronic devices
first came into prominence, pilots occasionally found that their sensitive avionic instruments
malfunctioned. Some experimentation with passengers pointed the finger at EMI from mobile
devices. Now, all electronic equipment must be turned off during the critical takeoff and landing
phasesofallflights.
CosmicRadiation
Even fault-tolerant NonStop processors may experience a similar problem. When a NonStop
processormisbehaves(andisreplacedautomaticallybyanother processor),HP oftenreturns the
processor to the factoryto be tested. A large proportion of these processors (some say80%) are
determined to be fine. One theory is that occasionally a particle from outer space (like a Gamma
ray) knocks an electron out of orbit in a semiconductor and causes it to have a transient failure.
Thisisn’tEMI,butitisanalogous.
2
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

NHTSATests
In 2008, the NHTSA (the US National Highway Traffic Safety Administration) reported after
testinga2007LexusES350:
“Magnetic fields were introduced in proximity to the throttle body and accelerator pedal
potentiometers and did result in an increase in engine revolutions per minute (RPM) of up to
1,000RPM,equivalenttoacold-idleengineRPMlevel.”
Soitcanhappen.
One outcome to note is that if EMI, a wayward cosmic particle, or any other random event
disrupts the processing function in an ECU, anything can happen. The result is totally
nondeterministic. Intended actions can be disrupted, and failsafe logic can fail. Arguments that
the software in the ECU protects against such happenings is totally invalid. Even having
independent, redundant ECUs that compare their results before issuing commands doesn’t solve
theproblem.AswehavepointedoutmanytimesintheAvailabilityDigest,allthisdoesistomove
backthebarriertoperfectoperation.Itnevereliminatesit.
No wonder the experts claim that testing has not been rigorous enough. It is probably impossible
tostructureareasonabletestthatwillaffirm ordenytheresponsibilityof EMIintheseincidences.
The NHTSA, aided byNASA and the National Academyof Sciences, has now decided to reopen
its investigation as to whether EMI could be a factor. However, at this point, the NHTSA asserts
thatithasnoreasontobelievethatEMIiscausingSUAincidents.
So What To Do?
Toyota has undergone a massive recall of over eight million cars worldwide (over five million of
them in the U.S.) to fix place mats and to modify accelerator pedals to correct the SUA problem
that owners are experiencing. Maybe this will eliminate such incidents, and the argument will be
over.Butiftheincidentscontinue,evenataslowerpace,whatisthenextstep?
ElectronicBrakeOverride
AsolutioncurrentlybeingimplementedbyToyotaandothermanufacturers(suchasChryslerand
Nissan) is abrakeoverride feature.This is appearing innew cars,andToyotais retrofittingsome
older cars going back to 2007. The feature gives priority to braking over throttle actions. If
sensorsarecallingforbothaccelerationandbraking,brakingwillwin.Thiswillsolvethefloor-mat
problem. But will it solve an EMI problem? After all, the brake override feature will be
implementedbythesameECUthatmaybeaffectedbyEMI.
Let us say that the Toyota fixes eliminate 90% of the SUAs. An SUA incident will still happen
about every one billion miles. Isn’t this probability so small that we can ignore it? Probably not. It
is estimated that Americans drive 3 trillion miles per year. If SUA incidents happen once every
one billion miles, we can expect about 3,000 SUA incidents a year. How many of these will be
fatal?Thus,thisprobabilitycannotbeignored.
At some point, we might have to conclude that the cause of SUA may never be determined and
thatthere will always bethepossibility,thoughremote,that an SUA incident can happen.Wewill
havetoacceptthats**thappens,andwewilljusthavetodealwithit.Howdowedothat?
3
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

MechanicalBrakeOverride
Clearly, there must be some failsafe method to control the car in the event that the ECU goes
haywire. This method must be totally independent of the ECU – we don’t want the failsafe
mechanismtoexperiencethesamefailurethattheECUisexperiencing.
One very good suggestion is to have a mechanical linkage that gives priority to braking. If the
brake is depressed, the linkage forces the throttle to close, slowing down the engine (goodbye to
racingcarstartsbyholdingthebrakeswhiletheenginerevsup).
This is an excellent solution, but it is still not totallyfailsafe since there is a remote possibilitythat
the mechanical linkage might fail. If the linkage can’t be easily tested, how will the owner know
thathislinkagehasfailedandthatitwillnotbetherewhenheneedsit?
The override mechanism must use nothing that can fail – electronics, relays, or mechanical
linkages.
TheUltimateFailsafeSolution
One such solution is a manual fuse that
disconnects the generator from the engine,
ensuring that the engine will stop. Think of a
red ring on the dashboard that you can pull
and break the electrical circuit from the
engine’s electrical power source – the
generator–totheengine’ssparkplugs.This
willstoptheenginenomatterwhat.
Itis hardtoseehowthissolutioncanfail.Or
have we simply moved the availability yankout
barrier back even further without eliminating tokill
engine
it?
Summary
WeintheIT communityarepainfullyawarethat gremlins hide in computer systems.Whether the
problem is EMI, software bugs, operator error, or HAL trying to take over Discovery One
(remember the movie “2001: A Space Odyssey”?), we must find absolutely failsafe methods to
identify and correct safety-critical computer faults. Of course, the ultimate failsafe method will
dependuponnoelectronicsormechanicallinkagesthatthemselvescanfail.
Is our “manual fuse” solution truly absolutely failsafe? No. It still depends upon human action.
Whataboutthepoor soul whohas rentedacar andhasn’tfamiliarizedhimself withthatfunnyred
knob on the dashboard? Can we ever really eliminate the availability barrier? Probably not. We
canonlykeepmovingitbackalittleatatime.Theproblemwillalwaysbewithus.
Justwaituntilsteer-by-wireisintroduced!
Post Script
The April 14th issue of USA Today reported that at least 131 Toyota owners experienced
unintended acceleration after their recalled vehicles were repaired at dealerships. The saga
continues.
4
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Acknowledgements
Materialforthisarticlewastakenfromthefollowingsources:
Toyota’sWorstNightmare:EMI-LinkedUnintendedAcceleration,Gearlog;March24,2010.
Couldelectronicsbewhat’scausingrunawaycars?,USAToday;February23,2010.
Toyota’sAccelerationIssueDuetoElectronics,ExpertsSay,TheEpochTimes;March28,2010.
Sudden Unintended Acceleration in RunawayCars: Is Electro-Magnetic Interference Causing it?,
ATCA;February26,2010.
US:ToyotarefutesEMIeffectsonacceleration,AutomotiveWorld;March24,2010.
Electronics Experts Discuss EMI in Sudden Acceleration Incidents, Interference Technology;
March25,2010.
Possible Electronics Causes for Sudden Unintended Acceleration, Professor Raj Rajkumar
(blog),CarnegieMellonUniversity;February23,2010.
Brake Overrides: The Devil in the Details, Professor Raj Rajkumar (blog), Carnegie Mellon
University;February19,2010.
FedsseekhelpwithToyotaScrutiny,USAToday;March31,2010.
5
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com