Anatomy of a DDoS Attack
April2013
Question:Whatarebotnetsusedfor? Answer:DistributedDenialofService(DDoS) Attacks.
Botnets arebad.TheDDoSattacks thattheycanlaunchareevenworse.ThedamageDDoSattackscan
do to a company’s public-facing Internet services, such as web sites, or to the Internet in general is
massive. The last few months have seen several examples of the use of botnets to bring major
corporationstotheirknees:
 In September, 2012, in retaliation for the anti-Islamic YouTube video “Innocence of Muslims,
Islamic hackers launched massive DDoS attacks against several U.S. banks that took down their
online banking portals for over a day each. In December, they repeated their attacks; and they
havevowedtocontinue the attacks untilthe video is removedfrom theInternet.1Their attacks so
farhavegeneratedupto70gbpsofmalicioustraffic–enoughtooverwhelmmostwebsites.
 In March of 2013, Spamhaus was hit with the most massive DDoS attack yet reported – a
maliciousdatarateof300gbps! Spamhausisafirm thatmaintainsablacklistofspam-generating
sites and sells the list to corporations, government agencies, and ISPs so that they can block
traffic from these sites. One of the web sites on the blacklist is CyberBunker. It is CyberBunker
thatissuspectedoflaunchingtheattack.2
Until these large attacks, most DDoS attacks generated about 10 gigabit-per-second (gbps) of malicious
traffic. Clearly, the severity of DDoS attacks is increasing. So is the frequency of attacks. Prolexic, a
DDoS mitigation firm,foundinits surveys that DDoS attacks increased53% from 2011to 2012.3Prolexic
hasmitigatedsevenattacksthatexceeded50gbps.
The concept of DDoS attacks is simple. Generate enough malicious traffic to a web site, and it will be
unabletorespondtolegitimaterequests.Ineffect,thewebsitehasbeentakendown.DDoSattackshave
beenusedforretaliation,forpoliticalstatements,forcompetitivereasons,andevenforransom.
Botnets
A single system is not powerful enough to generate enough traffic to overwhelm most systems. It takes a
concerted effort of manysystems to do so. This is a botnet. A botnet is a controlled collection of infected
1IslamicHacktivistsAttackU.S.Banks,AvailabilityDigest;October2012.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0710/bank_attacks.pdf
DDoSAttacksonU.S.BanksContinue,AvailabilityDigest;January2013.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0801/more_bank_attacks.pdf
2History’sLargestDDoSAttack?,AvailabilityDigest;April2013.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0804/spamhaus.pdf
3ProlexicQuarterlyGlobalDDoSAttackReport,ProlexicWhitePaper;2013.
1
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

systemsthatcanbecommandedtotakeajointactionuponrequest.ForDDoSattacks,thisjointactionis
thegenerationofmassiveamountsofmaliciousdatadirectedtowardavictimsystem.
Thereareseveralclassesofbotnets:
 Theearliestbotnets weremadeupofinfectedPCs.Typically,aPC wouldbeinfectedbyaTrojan
that entered the PC via a malicious email, a malicious web site, or an infected web site. The
Trojan would then allow the botnet master to download the DDoS software into the PC. PCs
cannot generate a great deal of traffic, if nothing else due to the bandwidth of its Internet
connection. A megabit per second (mbps) is typical. Therefore, to generate ten gigabytes per
secondoftraffic,thebotnetmustcomprisetenthousandPCs.
 Some attacks are politically popular and generate a great deal of support among a class of
people around the world. In this case, attackers have enlisted many people to voluntarily
contribute the services of their PCs to the botnet. The Islamist hackers that attacked the U.S.
banks in retaliation for the anti-Islamic YouTube video reportedly had access to hundreds of
thousandsofvoluntarilyprovidedPCs.Anotherexamplewasanattack launchedbysupportersof
JulianAssange,founderofWikiLeaks,whenhewasarrestedforleakingclassifiedmaterial.
 The limited capability of a PC to generate DDoS traffic is solved to a great extent by using
powerful servers instead. In this case, servers are infected with DDoS software, often through
known security vulnerabilities in popular programs such as Joomla and WordPress. A powerful
server with wide-band access to the Internet can generate a thousand times as much traffic as a
PC.
DDoS Strategies
LayersintheInternetProtocolSuite
There are several different strategies that DDoS attackers use to overwhelm a web site by attacking
differentlayersintheInternetprotocolsuite.TheInternetprotocolsuiteisdividedintofourlayers:
 The application layer contains the higher-level
protocols used by most applications for network
communication. Examples of application layer
protocolsincludetheFileTransferProtocol(FTP)and
theSimpleMailTransferProtocol(SMTP).
 The transport layer establishes host-to-host
connectivity Its responsibility includes end-to-end
message transfer independent of the underlying
network. End-to-end message transmission can be
categorized as either connection oriented (TCP) or Wikipedia–Internetprotocolsuite
connectionless(UDP).
 The internet layer provides an unreliable, best-efforts datagram transmission facility between
hosts locatedondifferentnetworks byforwardingthetransportlayer datagrams toanappropriate
next-hop router for further relaying to its destination. The Internet Protocol (IP) is the protocol
usedatthislayer.
 The link layer describes the protocols used to implement the local network topology needed to
effect transmission of Internet-layer datagrams between Internet layers. It includes the physical
routers, switches, hubs, firewalls, and other equipment required to implement local networks with
protocolssuchasEthernetandFibreChannel.
2
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

TypesofDDoSAttacks
DDoS attacks can be directed at any of these layers. In many cases, multiple layers are targeted in a
singleattack.
Ingeneral,therearethreeclassesofattacks:
 Network level: The network is bombarded with traffic, consuming all the bandwidth needed by
legitimate incoming requests. Such an attack can be as simple as sending massive numbers of
pings to the web site or as sophisticated as an amplified DNS attack, in which UDP queries
requiring large responses are sent to the web site’s DNS server. In these cases, the source IP
addresscanbespoofed;sothereisnoindicationofthesourceoftherequests.
 Infrastructure level: Network devices such as firewalls, routers, and switches are usually stateful.
They maintain state in internal tables. If their state tables fill, they can handle no further traffic.
DDoS attacks at the infrastructure level attempt to fill the state tables of network devices so that
theyareboggeddownandcannothandleanymorelegitimatetraffic.
 Applicationlevel:Thewebserver applications aretargeted. Asimpleexampleof this is amass of
login requests. The requests do not have to be successful – they just have to consume server
resources as thelogin is processedandrejected.If an attacker has managed to obtain legitimate
login names and passwords, it can do even more damage byinvoking application functions such
assearchesthatrequireagreatdealofprocessingcapacity.
AddressSpoofing
In almost all successful DDoS attacks, the IP address if the sender is forged (spoofed) so that the
locations and addresses of the attacking machines cannot be easily identified. The spoofed address can
berandomlyassignedfor eachmaliciousmessagetopreventfilteringof thepackets basedonthesource
address.
UDPFlood(ICMPFlood)
ICMPis theInternetControlMessageProtocol.Itis usedtosenderror messages indicating,for example,
thatarequestedserviceisnotavailableorthatahostorroutercouldnotbereached.
A UDP flood (also known as an ICMP Flood) is a mass of UDP requests sent to a victim system that
results in an equal mass of ICMP responses. For instance, requests maybe sent to random ports on the
victim machine. Most of these ports are likely not to be used, and the victim system will respond with a
“destination port unreachable” ICMP message. Given a high enough rate of malicious messages, the
target system will be so busy responding with ICMP messages that its ability to respond to legitimate
trafficwillbecompromised.
PingAttack
A ping attack is an ICMP attack in which the target system is flooded with ping requests (ICMP echo-
request message). The target system must respond to each ping request with a ping-response message
(ICMPecho-replymessage),thususingupprocessingcapacity.
PingSmurfAttack
A ping attack can be launched from a source that has a limited bandwidth capability. This is an amplified
ping attack. It depends upon the attacker finding systems in which the local networks are misconfigured
so that a broadcast address is exposed. That network then serves as a smurf amplifier. A ping request
3
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

with a spoofed sending address is sent to the broadcast address. The ping request is broadcast to all
systems on the local network, which respond with an echo-reply to the spoofed source address. The
spoofed source address is that of the victim machine. Its bandwidth becomes overwhelmed with ping
responses,preventingitfromhandlinglegitimatetraffic.
A ping smurf attack is one form of a reflected attack in which a large number of computers respond to a
forged request that has the victim’s address as a spoofed address. The DNS Reflection attack described
laterisanotherexampleofthiskindofattack.
SYNFlood
A SYN flood is a DDoS attack in which an attacker sends a succession of SYN requests to a target
system in an attempt to consume enough server resources to render the system unresponsive to
legitimatetraffic.
A SYN message is used by a client to initiate a connection with a server host. Normally, the sever host
will acknowledge the request by returning a SYN-ACK. The client responds with an ACK, and the
connectionisestablished.
In a SYN flood attack, the attacker sends multiple SYN requests to the victim server with spoofed source
IP addresses. In this way, the attacker’s ID is hidden and the attacker is not burdened with the servers’
responses.AspoofedclientwillnotreturnanACKsinceitknowsthatitdidnotsendaSYN.
The server will assign resources to the connection and will respond with a SYN-ACK. However, it will
never get the ACK to complete the connection. It will eventually timeout after about three minutes and
release the resources. The server eventually runs out of resources and is unable to handle any more
connections,therebydenyingservicetolegitimateusers.
An advantage of a SYN flood is that it does not require a massive amount of malicious traffic to be
generated. It can easily be carried out by a single machine. However, there are well-known and effective
countermeasurestothwartaSYNattack.
GET/POSTFloods
GET and POST are commands sent by an HTTP client (typically, a web browser) to an HTTP server
requestingservices.GET commands areusedtoretrieve datafrom aserver (forinstance,a picture), and
POST commands are used to update data on the server (for instance, a form). Each of these commands
use processing and disk resources of the server. Given a command rate sufficiently large, the server’s
processingresourceswillbeusedup,andtheserverwillbecomeunresponsivetolegitimatetraffic.
GET commandsareeasiertogenerate.ItisonlynecessarytosendaURLforapubliclyavailablepicture.
POST commands require some specific knowledge of a form available on the server. However, a GET
consumesfarfewerprocessingresources,andtherequestrateforGETshastobemuchhigherthanthat
forPOSTs.
An attacker will often look for long responses to GET or POST commands, as that indicates that the
serverisdoingagreatdealofprocessinginordertosatisfytherequest.
4
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

DNSReflection
DNS reflection is a particularly vicious type of attack since it can generate massive amounts of malicious
data sent to the victim with only a relatively small amount of effort on the part of the attacker. DNS
reflectiondependsuponDNSopenresolvers.
AnopenresolverisaDNSserverthatwillrespondtoarequestfromanysource.TheattackersendsDNS
requests to resolve an address to multiple open resolvers with the spoofed source IP address of the
victim.TheDNSsystem willreturnitsresponsetothe victim,thuspotentiallyoverwhelmingit.Thereason
that this is a particularly vicious attack is that the DNS response message is about 100 times as big
(about 3,000 bytes) as the request message (about 30 bytes). Therefore, the attacker can generate a
massiveamountofmalicioustrafficbygeneratingonly1%ofthattraffic.
DNS reflection was used in the recent attack on Spamhaus, referenced earlier, to generate a DDoS
attack of300gbps.Yearsago,DNSopenresolverswererecognizedasasecurityissue;andeffortswere
madetoclose allDNSresolvers.Unfortunately, network administrators are not particularlyincentivized to
update their DNS servers. There are still about 27 million open resolvers on the Internet, and their IP
addressesareknown.
Unintentional DDoS Attacks
DDoSattackscanbelaunchedinadvertently.WhenMichaelJacksondied, websitessuchasGoogleand
Twitter sloweddownor crashedduetounanticipatedtraffic.This problem occurssometimes whenaURL
ismentionedonTVandbecomespopular.
Another cause of unintentional DDoS attacks is a focused attack gone wrong. In August, 2009, the
operator of a game server in China attempted to shut down a group of competitors bylaunching a DDoS
attack on a DNS server used by his competitors. Unfortunately, this was a major DNS server in China’s
network. As it became overloaded, it sent DNS requests to other DNS servers, which in turn overloaded.
MuchofChina’sInternetservicewasdownforhours.
Legal action has been taken in at least one case. In 2006, Universal Tube and Rollform Equipment
Corporation sued YouTube. A massive number of potential YouTube users accidentally typed the tube
company’s URL address, utube.com. As a result, the company had to spend a large amount of moneyto
upgradeitsbandwidth.
Legality
DDoSattacksarespecificallyoutlawedbymanycountries.ViolatorsintheU.K.cangetuptoten yearsin
prison for carrying out these attacks. The U.S. has similar penalties, as do most major countries.
However,therearemanycountriesfromwhichDDoSattackscanbelaunchedwithoutpenalty.
In January, 2013, the well-known hacker group Anonymous filed a petition in the U.S. courts to
acknowledgeDDoSasalegalformofprotestsimilartotheOccupyprotests.
Mitigation Strategies
Some protection from DDoS attacks can be provided byfirewalls and intrusion-prevention (IPV) systems.
However, these devises can be overwhelmed by very large or complex attacks if the volume of malicious
traffic exceeds their capacity or if the sophistication of the attack is beyond the capabilities of their rule
sets.
The next step is to use the services of a DDoS mitigation company with large data centers that can
spread the attack volume over multiple data centers and scrub the traffic to separate bad traffic from
5
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

legitimate traffic. Prolexic, Tata Communications, AT&T, and Verisign are examples of providers of this
service.
Summary
DDoS attacks are here to stay. Theyare motivated by too manyfactors – retaliation, political statements,
attacking competitors, ransom –and are fairly easyto launch. There are even sophisticated tools that are
publicly available to launch significant massive attacks (itsoknoproblembro is a popular toolkit for DNS
reflectionattacks).ThedefensesagainstDDoSattacksareatbestlimited.
Companiesmustprepareforthelikelihoodoflosingtheirpublic-facingwebservicesandmustmakeplans
for how they will continue in operation if these services are taken down. This should be a major topic in
theirBusinessContinuityPlans.
6
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com