The Big One - Are You Ready?
September2015
Is it safe to build a datacenter on the Ring of Fire, that line of earthquakes and volcanos
that surrounds the Pacific Ocean? So far, this has not been a problem. But that is about
to change. We are well overdue for the mother of all earthquakes. The culprit? - the
Cascadia Subduction Zone. If you have a data center in this area, it may be time to prepare for its
extinction.
The Ring of Fire
The Ring of Fire, shown in Figure 1, is a
25,000-mile horseshoe-shaped line stretching
from the southwestern tip of South America
up along the western coast of North America,
then along eastern Asia, curling east of
Australia, and terminating in New Zealand. It
is home to over 75% of the earth’s volcanos.
It accounts for about 90% of the world’s
earthquakes and 81% of the world’s worst
earthquakes: Japan, 2011, magnitude 9.0;
Indonesia, 2004, magnitude 9.1; Alaska,
1964, magnitude 9.2; Chile, 1960, magnitude
9.5.
The Ring of Fire is a ring of subduction
zones. A subduction zone is a region of the
planet where one tectonic plate is sliding
underneath another (“subduction”). Tectonic
RingofFire
plates are those slabs of mantle and crust
Figure1
that, in their epochs-long drift, rearrange the
earth’s continents and oceans. Most of the
time,their movementis slow,harmless,andallbutundetectable.Occasionally,at theborders wherethey
meet, it is not. Nearly all the earthquakes in the region are caused by continental plates getting stuck on
oceanicplatesandthengettingabruptlyunstuck.
The Richter Scale
The Richter scale is a measurement of the power of an earthquake. It is a logarithmic scale. An
earthquake that is 7.0 on the Richter scale is ten times more powerful than a 6.0 earthquake and one
hundred times more powerful than a 5.0 earthquake. A 5.0 earthquake can be felt and will rattle the
dishes in a cupboard. An 8.0 earthquake can cause major damage, but most modern buildings in
earthquake-prone zones are built to withstand an earthquake of this magnitude. A 9.0 earthquake is
1
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

highly devastating and will cause significant damage, no matter what steps have been taken to mitigate
earthquakedamage.
Equallydestructivearethetsunamisthatoftenaccompaniesearthquakesthathaveoccurredintheocean
floor. Tsunamis can wash ashore with waves over one hundred feet tall, destroying everything in their
path.
In 2011, Japan suffered a 9.0 earthquake. The resulting tsunami washed across northern Japan and
killedmorethaneighteenthousandpeople.IttriggeredthemeltdownattheFukushimapowerplant
The San Andreas Fault
Most people in the United States are very aware of the San Andreas Fault, the most active subduction
zone in the U.S. It extends roughly 800 miles through California and is formed by the tectonic boundary
between the Pacific Plate and the North American Plate. Over the years, it has spawned many large
earthquakes in the 6.0 to 7.0+ range (with the largest ones in recent history being the 7.9 earthquake in
1857andthefamous7.8SanFranciscoearthquakein1906).
Many worry that the San Andreas fault is on the verge of unleashing the “big one.” However,
seismologists do not believe that this will happen. Every fault line has an upper limit to its potency as
determined by its length and width and by how far it can slip. For the San Andreas fault, that limit is
roughly an 8.2 earthquake, only six percent as strong as the 2011 9.0 Japanese earthquake (due to the
logarithmicnatureoftheRichterscale).
The Cascadia Fault
Though the San Andreas fault may not be the source of the “big one,” seismologists deem that the
Cascadiafaultisdeemedlikelytobe.LookingatFigure1,whichshowsthelocationofmajorearthquakes
along the Ring of Fire, you may note that the Pacific Northwest of North America seems to have been
spared. Should we then conclude that this is an area that is immune to large earthquakes? No, quite the
contrary.
This is the Cascadia Subduction Zone. It runs for seven hundred miles
off the coast of the Pacific Northwest, beginning near Cape Mendocino,
California, continuing along Oregon and Washington, and terminating
around Vancouver Island, Canada (Figure 2). Its “Cascadia” name
comes from the Cascade Range, a chain of volcanic mountains that
followthesamecourseahundredorsomilesinland.TheCascadiafault
is caused by the subduction of the Jaun de Fuca plate under the North
American plate. Yet not once in recorded history has the Cascadia fault
spawnedamajorearthquake–orforthatmatter,anyquaketospeakof.
This is not because there is no plate movement in the Cascadia
Subduction Zone. It is because the plates are really stuck, pushing
against each other, with neither moving. When they do finally let loose,
thatiswhenthe“bigone”willhappen.
WeseemtobewelloverduefortheCascadia“bigone.”Basedondeep-
soilresearch, we now know that theCascadiafault has unleashedforty-
onemassiveearthquakesinthelast10,000 years.Thatisanaverageof
oneevery244years.
The last Cascadia earthquake was in 1700, long before the U.S.
expandedtothewestcoast(Canadawasn’tevenanationthen).Noone
was around to document its devastation. It has been over 300 years
2
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

sincethis lastearthquake.Atan averagetimebetweenearthquakes of 244 years,weare overduefor the
“bigone.”
Will the “big one” happen a hundred years from now? Will it happen tomorrow? Seismologists give odds
ofabigCascadiaearthquakehappeninginthenextfiftyyearsasroughlyoneinthree.Theoddsofavery
bigoneareroughlyoneinten.
The Big One
Seismologistsdescribetheeffectsofthe“bigone”inaveryterrifyingway.ThefirstsignthattheCascadia
earthquake has begun will be compressional waves radiating out from the fault line. These are high-
frequency waves audible to dogs but not to humans.
The result will be a cacophony of barking dogs. Then
the shaking will begin. The northwest edge of the
continent,from CaliforniatoCanada,willdropasmuch
as six feet,losing withinminutes alltheelevationithas
gainedoverthelastmanycenturies.
Some of that shift will take place under the ocean,
displacing a massive quantity of seawater. The
resulting one-hundred foot tsunami will reach the
Northwest coast about fifteen minutes later. By the
time the shaking has stopped and the water has
receded, the region will be unrecognizable. FEMA, the
U.S. Federal Emergency Management Agency,
predictsthateverythingwestofInterstate5willbegone.
The Oregon Seismic Safety Policy Advisory Commission (OSSPAC) estimates that it will take between
one to three months to restore electricity to the Interstate-5 corridor. It will take one month to a year to
restore drinking water and sewer service, six months to restore major highways, and eighteen months to
restore health-care facilities. These estimates do not apply to the tsunami-inundation zone, which will
remainuninhabitableforyears.
Where Is Your Data Center?
If your organization has a data center in the Cascadia Subduction Zone, now is the time to plan for its
extinction.Youhaveseveraloptions.Theobviousoneistobackitupwithoneormoreotherdatacenters
– most large organizations probably already do this. However, in this case, keep your disaster recovery
planupdated and welltested. You willprobablyhavetofailover allprocessingfrom thefaileddatacenter
toothersurvivingdatacenters,andmission-criticalapplicationsmayrequirethatthisbedoneinminutes.
If you have only one data center, plan on moving it out of the subduction zone and to high ground –
severalhundredfeetabovesealevel,atleast.
You maynot need these precautions for the next hundred years. On the other hand, you mayneed them
tomorrow.
Summary
The Pacific Northwest of North America has seen little in the way of earthquake activity over the two-
hundred years or so that it has been settled. This can lull us into a sense of security that it is an
earthquake-safearea.Nothingcanbefurtherfromthetruth.
Theareahas seen littleearthquakeactivitybecausethetectonic plates intheCascadia SubductionZone
upon which it rests are pushing harder and harder against each other without moving. At some point, this
3
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

pressure will release; and the tectonic plates will rush into new positions. This will generate an
earthquakethatmaywellrepresenttheworstdisasterinNorthAmericanhistory.
A wide swath of the upper Northwest coast will be demolished, including any data centers that may be
located there. Now is the time for your organization to plan how it will handle this disaster. Otherwise,
oncethe“bigone”hits,yourorganizationmaysimplydisappear.
Acknowledgements
UnlockingtheCascadiaSubductionZone'ssecrets:Peeringintorecentresearch andfindings, Earth;July
20,2014.
TheReallyBigOne,NewYorker;July20,2015.
Cascadia SubductionZone:Mega EarthquakePredictions for 2015 are MegaquakeCrazy?, Inquistr;July
23,2015.
4
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com