Introduction to HP Serviceguard Clusters
HarishKamath
HPMasterArchitect
March2014
Clusters of computers can provide both high availability and high performance. While IT
infrastructuresaresusceptibletoplannedandunplanneddowntime,akeyrequirementofIT is
to minimize or eliminate these disruptions related to business. Proactively protecting IT
infrastructures from failures and service interruptions can be solved via HP’s clustering technology, HP
Serviceguard,toprovidehighavailabilityofITservices.
In addition to high availability, science and engineering functions depend upon a high performance
infrastructure to solve large problems in their work area. Weather forecasting, DNA analysis, market
predictions, where to drill for oil and gas, and advanced research in the field of science are a few
examples belonging to this sector. The requirement for high performance computing, which is not
solvable through typical stand-alone computers, is addressed by aggregating computing power in a way
that delivers higher computing capacity. Aggregation of computers for high performance computing is
alsoachievedthroughclustersofcomputersmanagedbyServiceguard.
In failover clusters, we refer to how quickly a workload fails over, thus providing high availability.
Computeclusters,however,refertotherateatwhichajobgetsprocessed.
Clustering technology allows individual nodes to operate in a coordinated manner to meet the needs of
high availability and scalability. Clusters can further be classified as Shared-Nothing, Shared-Storage
andShared-Everything,aclassificationessentiallyindicatingtheextentof resourcesharingamongnodes
of a cluster. An application running on any node of a cluster that must have simultaneous access with
applications running on other nodes to the samefile or data typicallyrequires a distributed lock manager;
this is a function provided by the Shared-Everything model. HP’s Serviceguard adopts the approach of
Shared-Nothing clusters, where no simultaneous access to data is permitted. HP addresses the Shared-
EverythingrequirementthroughitsOpenVMSClusteringtechnology.
While HP Serviceguard has taken the approach of Shared-Nothing, it is extensible to Shared-Storage
since it is tightly integrated with select cluster file systems. This facilitates simultaneous access to data
from cluster members. Yet another capability of Serviceguard is to integrate multi-node packages, thus
bringinginthenotionofactive-activeprocessingtoacluster.
Traditional high availability clusters are formed through a concept of cluster membership. Serviceguard
nodes within a cluster maintain a consistent view of all of the other member nodes in the cluster. The
nodes within a cluster continuously monitor the health and status of each other through a heartbeat
mechanism.
System or applications may malfunction due to hardware errors. Failures could also be the result of
certain dependentoperations exceeding acceptable threshold limits. Network congestion, for instance, is
1
©2014SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

a form of threshold violation in which systems or applications appear to respond incorrectly or initiate
fallback actions. Since the cluster heartbeat is a core functionality of a cluster and has a direct impact on
uptime, Serviceguard delivers multiple configuration options such as separating data from heartbeat
trafficbyutilizingseparatenetwork channelsandbyapplyingnetwork cardlevelredundancyforheartbeat
requirements,thusintroducingtolerancetonetworkcardfailures.
WhenaServiceguardclusterispartitioned,conditionssuchassplit-braincanbeeasilyrecoveredwiththe
help of HP’s advanced arbitration mechanisms, lock-LUN or quorum services. This helps maintain data
integrityandreliability.
System facilities also contribute to redundancy at various levels. HP Serviceguard leverages system
facilities such as network card-binding or floating IP addresses in its environment in order to provide an
additional layer of high availability. In short, the integration of a complex set of technologies and
mechanisms byServiceguardover the years prevents applicationfailures, which leads tohighapplication
uptime.
The clustered platform enables workloads to fail over across nodes of the cluster. The conditions under
whichfailovermaytakeplacemaybeduetoerrorconditionsobservedinoneofthecomponentsorbyan
act of policy enforcement related to load-balancing. HP Serviceguard delivers a platform to integrate a
variety of applications for addressing high availability with a high degree of modular automation
capabilities.
Virtualization products such as VMware and KVM attempt to deliver high availability to virtual machines
on their hypervisor platforms. This technology is often referred to as a pool manager. A pool of virtual
machines is typically managed via a centralized console, so systems are not clustered through a
membership mechanism. Application failover needs in such an environment are handled with the help of
HPServiceguardthroughasetofsupportedconfigurations.
Organizations utilizing the HP Serviceguard Solutions Suite are able to leverage highlyavailable services
with a wide range of applications to meet the needs of businesses. This solution maximizes uptime,
provides highperformance,andmeets thehighavailabilityrequirements atandacrosssites tobestserve
anorganization.
BHarishKamathcarriesadiverseprofile,withovertwodecadesofsoftwareindustryexperience. He
has contributed to infrastructure elements, be it in enterprise or cloud related technologies. As a
Master Architect, he currently leads the effort in developing artifacts to meet the needs of business
continuityandsecurityatlarge.
2
©2014SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com