– Our May Twitter Feed of Outages
May 2017
A challenge every issue for the Availability Digest is to determine which of the many
availability topics out there win coveted status as Digest articles. We always regret not
focusing our attention on the topics we bypass. With our new Twitter presence, we don’t
have to feel guilty. This article highlights some of the tweets that made headlines in
recent days.
Via Digest: "Accounting for Non-Accountants" is dedicated to programmers clueless
about financial systems they code
As Chairman of The Sombers Group, a custom software house that built large, real-time, mission-
critical systems, Dr. Bill Highleyman and his team were asked at times to develop bespoke financial
accounting applications. Trouble was that the programmers who implemented and maintained such
applications often lacked any understanding of accounting principles. To address programmers’
dilemma, Dr. Bill, now the Managing Editor of The Availability Digest, wrote “Accounting for Non-
Accountants.”
https://t.co/FEPdE94eje
136 complaints arise from ATO's string of HPE hardware outages
The Australian Taxation Office (ATO) has received a total of 136 complaints since it first experienced
an outage affecting its website, tax agent, and business portals on December 12, 2016. According
to the ATO, 13 of the 136 complaints received were lodged by tax practitioners, with the
majority of the remaining cases lodged by individuals.
https://t.co/k0r9U0ByTo
Outages In NYC, SF Come Amid Worries About Failing Infrastructure
Major power outages caused chaos on mass transit systems in both New York and San Francisco
on 21 April, with parts of both cities’ systems suffering ongoing outages or delays into the pre-
weekend afternoon commute. The outages occurred on the heels of an Infrastructure Report Card
that gave poor grades to both mass transit and power systems across the country.
https://t.co/6eAwZfGl65
1
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Massive power outage hits San Francisco, shuts down businesses, BART station, traffic
lights
A huge blackout probably caused by a fire at a PG&E substation swept through San Francisco on 21
April, bringing everyday life to a virtual standstill as homes and businesses and courtrooms went
dark, traffic lights stopped working, BART and Muni service slowed, and all the cable cars shut
down. The power failure, which at its height affected 88,000 customers, struck just after 9 a.m. and
extended through the Tenderloin and Chinatown, up Nob Hill, and into the Marina and the Presidio.
https://t.co/xxOElocnuB
Over 1,000 Intercontinental hotels hit by a data breach
The Intercontinental Hotels Group (IHG) thought only a handful of Holiday Inns were affected by
a data breach that happened last year, but it turned out to be a much bigger deal. In a
statement posted on its website, IHG has admitted that it found signs of malware designed to access
credit card data used at front desks in a lot more locations. A Krebs on Security reader did some
digging and found 1,175 impacted properties. That's a sizeable chunk of the 5,000 hotels IHG has
worldwide. According to the hotel chain's investigation, the malware was active from September 29
to December 29, 2016.
https://t.co/XU3BO4PU7f
How our 911 emergency call system can fail us
The babysitter of six-month-old Brandon Alex was frantically trying to reach 911. But that night in
March, more than 400 calls flooded the 911 center in Dallas. Two attempts went by without
connecting with an operator. Once the babysitter got through to an operator, she was on hold for 31
minutes. After Bridget Alex rushed home, she drove her son to the emergency room. Less than two
hours after the first call to 911, Brandon was dead. It wasn't the first such fatality.
https://t.co/99d5ObZ1j3
High Number of AWS Misconfigurations Leaves Huge Security Holes
The last day of February 2017 saw a big part of the Internet break, when Amazon Web Services Inc.
(AWS) experienced a massive outage. The outage was deemed to be the result of a
misconfiguration, and it gave AWS a big black eye. But misconfigurations aren't limited to AWS -- not
by a long shot.
https://t.co/KCyXH2p41e
Blackout Tracker Shows the 3,879 Times We Wished We Had More Microgrids
Rogue lawn mowers. Toppling Cranes. Frogs and snakes. You never know what will cause power
outages and get people thinking about microgrids. Eaton’s new Blackout Tracker Annual Report
shows 3,879 instances in 2016 when having more microgrids would have been nice. That’s the
number of times the power went out for more than 48 minutes, affecting 18 million people in the
United States.
https://t.co/UzBnrNnaG2
2
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

ATO website takes extended Easter break in another online failure
The Australian Taxation Office has been forced to apologise again for its troubled online service,
with the website down following four days of maintenance. The ATO website suffered a massive
outage in December last year and again in February. After the December system failure, the ATO
scrambled to recover the equivalent of 20 million four-drawer filing cabinets of data. The new system
maintenance was planned to give the ATO technical staff time to upgrade the system from the
problematic storage area network, provided by Hewlett Packard Enterprises, that caused the recent
failures.
https://t.co/OOCf55ndMb
5 lessons from Amazon’s S3 cloud blunder – and how to prepare for the next one
According to Internet monitoring platform Catchpoint, Amazon Web Service’s Simple Storage
Service (S3) experienced in late February a three hour and 39-minute disruption that had cascading
effects across other Amazon cloud services and many internet sites that rely on the popular cloud
platform. That experience should be a wakeup call to make sure your cloud-based applications are
ready for the next time the cloud hiccups. Here are five tips for preparing yourself for a cloud outage:
https://t.co/x9xD7K2iJo
Delta's latest mess highlights an industry weakness
The latest imbroglio at Delta Air Lines (DAL), which canceled more than 3,500 flights in April,
exposes a chink in the airline industry’s operations: its vulnerability to broad disruptions, whether due
to severe weather or computer crashes. Critics are wondering why the industry -- the problem
ranges beyond Delta -- isn’t better equipped to handle adversity, especially since it’s now flying high
financially. Certainly, the industry in general has received plenty of criticism that its complex
systems, bolted together over the decades, require major upgrades.
https://t.co/3oiNrbpwLw
When Software Flaws Kill Your Profits, Modernize Your IT Systems
Last August, technical issues at Delta Airlines forced it to cancel over 2,300 flights. The delays were
so expensive the carrier downgraded its profit guidance for the third quarter – an over $100m
revenue hit. Cause? Several hundred servers had not been able to connect to Delta’s backup
system during an outage, a failure of business continuity after a primary system outage. A month
later, thousands of British Airways passengers across the US suffered hours of delays, some lasting
overnight. Delta and BA’s woes were far from unique. All major airlines have experienced expensive
and widely publicized IT glitches in recent years. Structural flaws in the source code of computer
systems are the most frequent culprits of operational incidents. Welcome to the era of 9-digit
defects. When losses from IT malfunctions hit 5 or 6 digits (a mere $100,000 or so), IT managers are
at risk; when it hits 7 or 8 digits, IT and line-of-business executives take the heat. When losses hit 9
digits, as they did at Delta, the C-suite take the calls.
https://t.co/apDVbJQMm6
3
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

How the airline industry can smooth IT turbulence through machine learning
Glitches within airline IT systems regularly cause problems, ranging from short delays to
worldwide outages that knock thousands of flights off schedule. Could machine learning (ML)
and other artificial intelligence (AI) tools change that? It's still in the early days, but some airline
industry analysts and IT providers are hopeful that they can. Mark Jaggers, a research director
with Gartner, sees three areas within aviation IT that are ripe for improvement through cutting-
edge data tools:
• Testing techniques, including simulations
• Automatic and proactive alerts around critical infrastructure and processes
• Automated workload and resiliency programs
https://t.co/qac83sRrkI
Move over cloud, the future of online file storage could be fog
Cloud computing has already changed the way we work and store our files, and use of the
technology is only expected to grow as our thirst for data outstrips the availability and capability of
physical resources. Yet the technology is not without its caveats, namely that you're entrusting your
files into a system over which you have little control: If something goes wrong, your files could be
lost or fall into the wrong hands. Computer scientists in Italy are now working on a new concept that
could reduce the risks involved with storing your files on the cloud with a new system that disperses
them across multiple remote locations – and they're calling it fog.
https://t.co/o3Qb2jgYTJ
How Fog Computing Will Shape the Future of IoT Applications And Cybersecurity
Fog computing is an extension of cloud computing to adjust to the emerging Internet of things. The
IoT is connected to a vast array of devices, including mobile phones, wearables, smart TVs, smart
homes, smart cars and even smart cities. Public cloud computing provides the computing space to
process this volume of data through remote-located servers. But uploading this amount of data to
remote servers for analysis and delivering the results back to the original location takes time, which
can slow down processes that demand rapid responses. Additionally, when Internet connectivity is
unreliable, relying on remote servers becomes problematic. Fog computing uses distributed
computer resources located closer to local devices to handle processes that demand rapid
