Australia’s Painful Banking Outages
March2012
February 9, 2012. The National Australia Bank’s online banking services suddenly disappeared at 8:20
pm. NAB’s eight-million customers nationwide were left without access to ATMs, Internet banking,
telephonebanking,andcredit-cardservices.Bills couldnotbe paidonline.Customers couldnot withdraw
cashfromtheiraccounts.
NAB reported that service had been returned to normal at 2:00
am,buttheoutagecontinued.At12:30pm thenextday,thebank
issued a statement confirming that it had suffered a total outage
and could not predict when service would be restored. However,
a short time later, at 2:20 pm,the bank’s online services returned
to normal. The bank’s customers had been left without banking
services,cash,andcredit/debitcardservicesforeighteenhours.
This outage continued a series of major outages at Australia’s four largest banks over the last two years.
The National Australia Bank (NAB), Commonwealth Bank, the Australia and New Zealand Bank (ANZ),
and Westpac have all have had their shares of outages affecting ATMs, retailers’ POS devices, and
online banking. The outages have occurred as these historic banks engage in multi-year replacements of
theiragingcorelegacysystems,somedatingbacktothe1980s.Apparently,thesesystemshavebecome
quitefragileintheiroldage.
Let us look at the string of online banking failures and the response of Australia’s financial regulatory
authoritiestotheconsequentlossofconfidencebyAustraliansintheirricketybankingsystem.
National Australia Bank
November,2010
Inadditiontoitsretail,corporate,andotherbankingservices,NABclearspaymentsformanyotherbanks
in Australia, including Commonwealth Bank, Westpac, ANZ, HSBC, Citibank, and Bank of Queensland.
To perform this responsibility, NAB conducts nightly batch runs on behalf of its partner banks. A
transaction-historyfileshowing allpaymentactivityfor eachbank is generatedandis senttothatbank by
theendofday.
Early on the morning of Wednesday, November 24, 2010, NAB’s partner banks went on high alert when
they did not receive their transaction files.1 Without these files, the banks had no record of the previous
day’s transactions that affected their customer accounts. Payroll deposits could not be made. Credit-card
1NationalAustraliaBank’sCustomersDownforDays,AvailabilityDigest;December2010.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0512/national_australian_bank.pdf
1
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

payments werefrozen.Directdebits for billpaying wentintolimbo.Interbank paymentsceased.TheNAB
ATMs were down, as were its online banking services. Retailer point-of-sale terminals managed by NAB
wereuseless.Centrelinkwelfarepaymentscouldnotbemadetotheneediestfamiliesinthecountry.
It was reported that someone from NAB’s IT department inadvertently uploaded an erroneous file that
“corrupted” the system. The conjecture is that the file contained the instructions for managing the batch-
processingcycle.Itapparentlycausedmanytransactionstobeduplicatedandthebatchruntofail.
The problem did not last for hours. It lasted for days as customer accounts were reconciled. Some
problemscarriedoveralmosttwoweeksaftertheincident.
Following this disaster, NAB outsourced some of its data-center operations to IBM. Did that make things
better?AskWestpac.ItsunfortunateexperiencewithanIBM-provideddatacenterisdescribedlater.
January,2011
A glitch in NAB’s secure login system took down telephone banking at 9 am on January 31, 2011.
Fortunately,securitywasnotbreached;andtelephonebankingwasrestoredsevenhourslater.
April,2011
Déjà vu. Just five months after its November, 2010, batch processing meltdown, NAB suffered a similar
outage. A problem in its overnight batch settlement system caused transaction files not to be delivered to
its partner banks. The problem took several hours to fix. Days passed before the bank could catch up on
theresultingbacklogandreconcileitscustomeraccounts.
NAB’sNextGenerationITPlatform
To upgrade its aging infrastructure, NAB has embarked on a multiyear upgrade of its systems. The Next
GenerationITPlatform(NGP)willreplacemanyofthebank’slegacysystemsinthenearfuture.
In October, 2011, NAB’s CEO, Cameron Clyne, reassured NAB’s shareholders that the benefits of NGP
were coming. Network transformation had been completed, and effort was ongoing on the infrastructure
layer.Outageincidentsinretailnetworksandbusinessbankinghaddroppedbyover50%.
ThencameFebruary9th.Asdescribedpreviously,NABlostitsonlinebankingservicesforeighteenhours.
Clearly,theNGPprogramhasawaystogo.
Westpac
March,2011-Twice
Westpac has fared no better than NAB when it comes to Internet outages. On March 3, 2011, some
customers wokeuptofind thattheycouldnotlogontoWestpac’s online banking services.Theproblems
were intermittent and seemed to move from customer to customer. Affected customers could not transfer
funds,usetheircreditcards,orgetcashfromsomeATMs.Tothesurpriseofmanycustomers,ATMsthat
didworkdeliveredmorecashthanwhatwasintheiraccount,leadingtothearrestoftwomen.
The problem was evidently due to server overload. Westpac reported that its servers were running at
80% of capacity during this time. Presumably, random customer attempts to use its online services were
timingout.
Then, just two weeks later, on March 15, 2011, Westpac suffered another outage. None of its customers
could log on to its online banking services. Online banking was down for an hour before services were
restored.
2
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

May,2011
Data centers can go down for manyreasons, from environmental problems to destructive events. On the
morning of May 3, 2011, Westpac suffered a major data-center loss due to the former. One of the data
center’s air conditioning units failed, and apparently there was not enough spare capacity to carry the
datacenter.
Servers had to be shut down as temperatures rose in the data center, causing a prolonged outage of the
bank’s online banking services and affecting all of its twelve-million customers. ATMs, credit/debit card
use,andonlinebankingservicesdisappeared.
ATMs and card services were down for several hours until they were restored by late morning. Online
bankingtookadditionaltimetorestore.
Westpac had outsourced its data center to IBM. Questions arose as to why IBM had not provided
sufficientcoolingcapacityinthedatacentertoprotectagainstthefailureofanairconditioningunit.
February,2012
On February21, 2012,Westpac was once again hit by a severe outage of its online services. Customers
could not get cash from ATMs and in some cases not even from the bank’s branches. Services were
downforseveralhours.
The bank explained that it was in the process of upgrading its IT infrastructure and that the problem was
due to a “home page” issue. Ironically, the bank had just reported record profits while customers were
experiencingseveralIT-relatedproblems.
Commonwealth Bank
December,2010
On December 14, 2010, Commonwealth Bank customers experienced intermittent outages in their online
bankingandATMtransactions.Commonwealthstatedthattheproblemswereduetoan“overduerunning
of a computer file.” It was those customer accounts that required data from the late running file that had
difficultyaccessingcashthroughATMsortransferringfundsviaonlinebanking.
March,2011
Again,CommonwealthBank customersfoundonMarch1,2011,thattheycouldnottransferfunds or pay
billsonline.RetailPOSmachineswereaffected,andscheduledpaymentsweredelayed.
However, this time, cash from the bank’s ATMs was plentiful – too plentiful for some. The technical
problem forced Commonwealth to take its ATMs offline. Its ATMs could still dispense cash, logging the
transactions locally in the ATM. Since there was no check of a customer’s account balance, customers
found that they could withdraw any amount by simply visiting several of the bank’s ATMs. Word of this
bonanza quickly spread, and there were reports of people queuing up at the bank’s ATMs to take
advantageofthesituation.
Once service was restored and the ATM logs processed, the bank realized that some customers had
systematically and deliberately set out to withdraw money that wasn’t theirs. It froze or closed the
accounts of those customers, including many on welfare, and threatened legal action to recover the
“stolen”funds.
3
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

June,2011
Commonwealth again lost its Internet banking on June 16, 2011, for most of the afternoon. Customers
were unable to complete bill payments, transfer funds, and initiate international money orders. However,
telephonebankingremainedoperational,asdidthebank’smobilewebsite.
Australia and New Zealand Bank (ANZ)
Thisisgettingtobe“sameold,sameold.”We’llbebriefer.
June,2010–twice
OnJune16,2010,bothInternetbankingandtelephonebankingwereinterruptedduetoadiskerror.
Once again, ANZ left 1.8 million customers without banking services on June 22, 2010. EFTPOS and
online banking were down for two hours. Only limited cash withdrawals could be made from the bank’s
ATMs.
August,2010
ANZ’s third failure in as manymonths occurred on August 24, 2010. Credit/debit cards could not be used
at retail stores for a period of three hours. However, ATMs and the bank’s branches continued in
operation.
May,2011
Online services were unavailable for over an hour during the middle of the day. Restoration of services
requiredtherebootingofservers.
Australia’s Regulatory Response
The ongoing series of online outages at Australia’s banks have finally elicited a strong response from
Australia’sfinancialregulatoryagencies.
ReserveBankofAustralia
Australia’s central bank, the Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA), is cracking down on the operational
disruptions of the country’s leading banks over the last two years as they undergo multi-year IT
transformationprojectstoreplacetheiraginglegacycorebankingplatforms.
RBA has warned the banks that they will face tougher rules for reporting outages in their retail payments
systems,anditisformalizingtherequirementsforreportingsuchincidents.Itmayalsoinsistonadditional
measures suchas investigations into theorganization of the bank’s retail operations.RBA states that it is
particularlyinterestedinuncoveringsourcesofvulnerabilityinthebanks’retailoperationalprocesses.
AustralianPrudentialRegulationAuthority
Australia’s finance industry regulator, the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA), has
expressed its lack of tolerance for service outages of Australia’s banks due to neglected legacy systems.
4
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

It understands that it is necessary for the banks to continue to replace aging systems; but APRA will not
accept outages due to institutions running outdated, unsupported operating systems, hardware, or
software.Nor will itstandfor outages caused byrunningcriticalsystems withsingle points of failureor by
losingcriticalskills.ItwarnedagainstcuttingITbudgets.
Summary
In today’s high-technology world, there is an expectation of high availabilityand high resilience for critical
services such as banking. Institutions today cannot cover up IT failures. There is no place to hide from
TwitterandFacebook.
Jorn Bettin, an analyst with Intelligent Business Resource Services, a company providing research and
advice to Australian IT managers and business managers, suggests that Australian bank customers for
the next decade can expect regular outages of keybanking systems. Banks will continue to struggle with
systemoutagesastheyworktoreplacetheiraging,thirty-yearoldlegacybankingsystems.
Newer financial institutions will have an edge over the historic banks because they are starting with
modern systems. For instance, Tyro Payments, Australia’s only independent provider of EFTPOS
merchantservices,hasarecordof100%availability.
RichardBuckle,anindustryanalystwithhisrootsinAustralia,summedupthesituationinarecentblogin
which he said that “…nowhere have I seen disruptions arriving on such a regular basis as they are in
Australia,andIjusthavetoputitdowntoextremelypoorexecution.…Computersystemsarerobustand
networksarereliable–butasforthecurrentcropofCIOs,youjusthavetowonder.”2
Acknowledgements
In addition to the references previously made, material for this article was taken from the following
sources:
National Australia Bank customers lose all services due to technical outage, Herald Sun; February 10,
2012.
NABcomputercrashcutsATM,EFTPOS,TheAustralian;February10,2012.
NABstruggleswithtechglitch,SydneyMorningHerald;February10,2012.
BanksystemcrashcausesnationwideEFToutage,ATMMarketplace;February10,2012.
NABIToutagecutspayments,ITNews;November25,2010.
NationalAustraliaBankGlitchLeavesMillionsCashless,Excalibur;November26,2010.
OnlinebankingoutagehitsNAB,TheAustralian;January31,2011.
NABreportscontinuedspendingonNextGenerationBankingITplatform,Techworld;May5,2011.
NextGenerationITPlatform(NGP)valuewillcome:NAB,Techworld;October27,2011.
WestpacconfirmsNetbankingissue,Computerworld;March3,2011.
Westpacreportsanotheronlinebankingglitch,Computerworld;March15,2011.
Updated:WestpacairconcausesITmeltdown,Techworld;May3,2011.
Westpacpromisesreviewintooutage,Techworld;May5,2011.
AirconfaulttriggersIToutageatAustralianbank,InformationAge;May5,2011.
Westpacsorryforelectronicbankingoutage,ABC;May5,2011.
WestpacsuffersoutageasRBAcracksdownonbankglitches,TheAge;February21,2012.
WestpachitbyATM,eftposoutage,SydneyMorningHerald;February24,2012.
CommonwealthfixedNetBankglitch,Computerworld;December14,2010.
Updated:CommBankreportsanotheroutage,Computerworld;March1,2011.
CBAstillplanstorecoverATMglitchcash,Techworld;April15,2011.
CBAonlinebankingsitemalfunctions,Techworld;June16,2011.
2Hey,Wally,what’sup?,RichardBuckleblog,ATMMarketplace;February27,2012.
http://www.atmmarketplace.com/blog/7502/Hey-Wally-what-s-up
5
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

AuditshineslightonANZonlinebankingoutages,ITNews;July6,2010.
ANZcustomerscash-strappedafternetworkoutage,Computerworld;June22,2010.
ANZsufferssecondEFTPOSoutagein3months,Computerworld;August24,2010.
ANZonlinebankingsuffersshortoutage,ITNews;May17,2011.
RBAlaunchesprobeintoOzbankingoutages,FinextraNews;February21,2012.
RBAmovesononlinebankingfailures,Lafferty;undated.
RBAexposesthebankingindustry’srepeateddisruptionstoretailpaymentssystems,Connolly
Partnership;undated.
APRAwarnsagainstITcostcutting,ITNews;February27,2012.
Australianbankcustomerscanexpectregularoutagesofkeybankingsystemsforthenextdecade,
accordingtoananalyst,ZDNet;undated.
6
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com