Nasdaq Taken Down by Software Flaw
September2013
Thursday,August22, 2013, was a baddayfor thestock market.TheNasdaqstock exchange went down
for most of the afternoon, halting trading in major stocks such as Microsoft, Apple, Google, and
Facebook. 3,200 stocks were paralyzed. The outage is being called the “flash freeze” after the 2010
“flash crash” during which high-frequency computer trading dropped the Dow by 1,000 points for a few
minutes
Initially,Nasdaqofferednoexplanationfor theoutage. Then,over thenextseveral days,there was active
fingerpointing between Nasdaq and its major competitor, the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE). Finally,
Nasdaqadmittedthattheoutagewascausedbyasoftwarefailureinoneofits systems,butonethat was
aggravated by the NYSE. A heavy burst of messages from the NYSE electronic trading system
overwhelmed Nasdaq’s market reporting system, and Nasdaq suffered a failover fault as it tried to switch
toitsbackupsystem.
The Outage
The problem began when Nasdaq’s Securities Information Processor (SIP) became overloaded. SIP
drives the data feed that delivers pricing information to the “consolidated tape,” the national record of all
securitiesquotesthatensuresthattradesoccuratthemostcompetitiveprice.
When it became apparent to Nasdaq that SIP was unable to report
Nasdaq price quotes on a timely basis, it decided to halt all trading
until the problem could be resolved in order to ensure a fair and
orderly market. Trading was halted at 12:14 PM. The Nasdaq
markets finally reopened at 3:25, just thirty-five minutes prior to
closing.StockpriceswerestablewhentheExchangereopened.
Nasdaq shared little information during its outage, sowing confusion
among traders and investors. Nasdaq traders weren’t immediately
aware that Nasdaq had stopped trading. It took almost two hours for
Nasdaq to send a message acknowledging the outage. This
message is critical to automated trading systems that use it to stop
tradinginhaltedstocks.
Ultimately, Nasdaq blamed the NYSE’s Arca electronic trading system for sending heavy blasts of
messagestoSIPthatoverloadedSIPandcauseditsfailure.SIPwasrestoredinthirtyminutes,butittook
almostthreehourstoreturnittoservice.
The Fingerpointing
The SEC immediately asked Nasdaq and the NYSE to come up with a timeline of the outage. It took
almost a week to do so because Nasdaq and the NYSE could not agree on details. They each had a
1
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

different view as to what happened before and during the outage and blamed the other party for the
failure.
What they did agree on was that Arca experienced difficulties connecting with SIP during the morning of
August 22. Arca tried over twenty times to connect with SIP, each attempt requiring that significant
resourcesbeexpendedbySIP.
With each attempt came a blast of messages from Arca. Nasdaq characterized these messages as
containing inaccurate symbols to which it had to respond with quote rejects. The NYSE countered that
connectivity problems were common. When it has connectivity problems, its common practice is to send
out“zeroquote”messagestoensurethatnostaletradeswouldbesenttothemarket.
Nasdaq believed that Arca’s connectivity problems and consequent message floods led to a potential
freeze in SIP as its memory reached capacity. It shut down the Arca connection before the SIP froze. Its
serverswereoverwhelmed,anditwasunabletoswitchovertoitsbackupsystem.
NYSE’s view of the outage was that Nasdaq inadvertently shut down the Arca connection for fifteen
minutes. Connection was reestablished and ran properly for 45 minutes. Nasdaq then requested that
Arca voluntarily shut down the connection. The NYSE believed that this exposed a flaw in the Nasdaq
system.Nomatterwhat,SIPshouldnotbegoingdown.
Nasdaq’s Admission
About a week after the outage, Nasdaq concluded its study and published the results in its newsroom.1 It
concluded that the outage was partly its fault due to a software bug, but that the outage was mostly the
faultofArca.
AccordingtoNasdaq’s findings,the problems startedaround 10 AM when Arca could notconnectto SIP.
Arca tried more than twenty times that morning to connect. Between each attempt, it sent out a mass of
zero-dollarquotestoensurethatnostaletradeswouldbereported.SIPhadtorespondwithquoterejects
toeachofthesemessages.
The problem was the rate at which Arca was sending these messages – about 1.3 million messages per
second! SIP had been designed to handle the expected peak traffic from its member exchanges with
ample extra capacity. It has fifty communication ports, and each port can handle 10,000 quotes per
second for a grand total of 500,000 quotes per second. This capacity had been verified by Nasdaq in a
testconductedthepreviousJanuary.
A normal rate for an August day is about 1,000 quotes per second per port, one-tenth of the port’s
capacity. The Arca message rate amounted to 26,000 quotes per second per port – 2.6 times the
capacityoftheSIPports.
Nasdaq turned off Arca’s access to SIP around 11 AM. By 11:17, Arca seemed to be working properly.
However,theimmenseamountofdatasentbyArcaoverwhelmedSIP.TheNasdaqattemptedtorecover
by switching over to its backup, but a latent software flaw made the failover ineffective. With the backup
system in operation, there were long delays in reporting quotes. The combination of large system inputs
and delayed outputs ultimately degraded the ability of the SIP to process quotes to such an extent that
shutting down the system was in the broader public interest to prevent information asymmetry and to
ensurefairconditionsforallmarketparticipants.Nasdaqdecidedtohalttradingat12:14PM.
Within a half hour, Nasdaq had SIP up and running. However, it took another three hours to test the
system and to evaluate scenarios with its SIP committee members and market participants to reopen the
marketforfair andorderlytrading.TheNasdaqmarketreopenedat3:25PMand performedproperlyuntil
itsnormalclosingtimeat4PM.
1NASDAQOMXProvidesUpdatesonEventsofAugust22,2013,NASDAQOMXNewsroom;August29,2013.
2
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Nasdaq said that it was “deeply disappointed” in its performance and called it unacceptable to its
members,issuers,andtheinvestingpublic.
A major Nasdaq failure was in not keeping the trading and investment community informed as to what
was happening. Nasdaq is studying ways to post information in real time, including social media such as
twitter, and opening up additional phone lines for market participants to hear directly from Nasdaq
officials.
This outage exposed serious flaws in the design of SIP. It was not designed to throttle, or forcefully slow
down,theflowofdatatopreventoverload.NasdaqisstudyingplanstomakeSIPmoreresilient,including
architecturalimprovements,informationsecurity,disasterrecoveryplans,andcapacityparameters.
Summary
Of concern to many, especially after the flash crash of 2010, was the extent to which high frequency
computerizedtradingplayedaroleinthisoutage.Nasdaqconcludedthatsuchtradingwasnotafactor.
However, this outage highlighted the fragility of the world’s financial backbone. Last year, Nasdaq was
bruised by the botched initial public offering of Facebook. Today’s financial systems are so complex and
so interactive that it may be impossible to envision every failure scenario. Outages such as this flash
freezearelikelytobecomemorecommonasexchangesandbrokeragefirmscompetetoofferthefastest
andmostcomprehensiveservices.
Nasdaq and the NYSE are currently the top exchanges in U.S. securities. However, that is about to
change. The BATS Global Market and Direct Edge exchanges have said that they would merge, creating
an exchange larger than Nasdaq in U.S. stock trading. The NYSE is the number one U.S, exchange
operator. After merging with Euronext to form NYSE Euronext, it is now merging with the Intercontinental
Exchange(ICE).
Exchange systems are only going to get more complex, with more opportunities for headline-setting
failures.
Acknowledgements
Theinformationforthisarticlewastakenfromthefollowingsources:
NasdaqinFreshMarketFailure,WallStreetJournal;August22,2013.
NasdaqBreakdownPutsPressureonCrisiswork, ContinuityInsights;August23,2013.
Exclusive: Nasdaq, NYSE at odds on outage cause as SEC seeks facts, Yahoo! Finance; August 27,
2013.
SECreviewsNasdaqasrivalsblameeachotherforoutage,Reuters;August27,2013.
ShutdownatNasdaqIsTracedtoSoftware,Yahoo!Finance;August29,2013.
Nasdaqsayssoftwarebugcausedtradingoutage,Reuters;August29,2013.
NASDAQ OMX Provides Updates on Events of August 22, 2013, NASDAQ OMX Newsroom; August 29,
2013.
NasdaqblamesrivalNYSEArcafor3-Hourtradingoutage,TheRegister;August30,2013.
3
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com