– Our February Twitter Feed of Outages
February 2018
A challenge every issue for the Availability Digest is to determine which of the many
availability topics out there win coveted status as Digest articles. We always regret
not focusing our attention on the topics we bypass. With our new Twitter presence,
we don’t have to feel guilty. This article highlights some of the tweets that made
headlines in recent days.
The Pentagon still uses computer software from 1958
In 1958, the DoD's first contracting software was launched using an early computer language called
COBOL. As of 2017, that software still manages Pentagon contracts. According to Technology
Review, the program known as MOCAS, Mechanization of Contract Administration Services, began
its life on punchcards. Eventually, it was updated to green screened, terminal-style computers.
Though a new-looking graphic interface often replaces the antiquated green text prompts, the
insides are still very much the same. A series of new additions and plug-and-play storage devices
hide an eight-gigabyte RAM system that manages $1.3 trillion in Pentagon contracting.
The reason the system was never replaced is due to the fact that its replacement would have to
immediately take over the entire system as a whole to ensure that no contract — and none of the
money — is lost in the transition.
https://t.co/pDpVcv0QIW
The hidden challenges of modernization
In the next three years, an estimated UDS $3 billion worth of U.S. Federal IT equipment will reach
end-of-life status. It’s an intimidating number and one that indicates just how far-reaching the need is
for modernization. With so much focus on the sheer cost of mass obsolescence, many agencies
overlook the opportunities that modernization presents and treat it as an obstacle that must be
overcome.
https://t.co/zzRv4Wik3z
Stephen Hawking’s Institute Will Use Supercomputers to Uncover Secrets of the
Universe
Though there are still many mysteries of the universe that remain and which we look forward to
solving with the next biggest breakthrough or discovery, a new joint effort between Hewlett-Packard
Enterprise’s (HPE) newest supercomputer and the Center for Theoretical Cosmology
(COSMOS), Stephen Hawking’s research group, hopes to come one step closer to doing this.
https://t.co/g08SMjywJm
1
© 2018 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Report: Software failure caused $1.7 trillion in financial losses in 2017
Consumers and businesses depend on software every day for a variety of functions; and when bugs
strike or errors occur, the consequences can be staggering. In a recent report, software testing
company Tricentis analyzed 606 software fails from 314 companies to better understand the
business and financial impact of software failures. The report revealed that these software failures
affected 3.6 billion people and caused $1.7 trillion in financial losses and a cumulative total of 268
years of downtime. Here are five takeaways from the company’s Software Fail Watch 2017 report.
https://t.co/ypRAq6Y4rf
Facing Down the Legacy Software Dilemma
We often hear that younger firms are likely to invest more on technology than older and established
firms. The truth is that older firms are willing to spend the big bucks to upgrade their infrastructure,
but there’s a complication. The challenge for established firms is upgrading portfolio accounting and
reporting legacy software that contains many years of transactional data for thousands of accounts.
With so much important client data at stake, advisors attempt to tackle the legacy dilemma by
keeping their current technology.
https://t.co/edvN86HLw5
World's Largest Offshore Wind Farm Starts Construction
Offshore construction has kicked off at what will become the world's largest offshore wind farm,
the Hornsea Project One. The first of 174 monopiles, or foundations for offshore wind turbines,
has been installed at the site, located off the Yorkshire coast in the United Kingdom. The project,
developed by Danish energy giant Ørsted (formerly called Dong Energy), is expected to be fully
operational by 2020 and will have a capacity of 1,200 megawatts, or enough power for more than
one million UK homes. To compare, the London Array, currently the largest offshore wind farm in the
world, has a 630-megawatt capacity, or enough to power about half a million homes.
https://t.co/v6hqtsPB3O
Microsoft issues emergency Windows patch to disable Intel's buggy Spectre fix
If you’ve noticed any unexpected reboots or PC instability as a result of the recent Spectre patches,
there’s a solution. Microsoft has issued an emergency Windows patch that rolls back the recent
Spectre mitigations. Microsoft’s latest patch (KB4078130) allows people with affected systems to
download the patch via the Microsoft Update Catalog.
https://t.co/JzaZYX6uCM
Majority of local authorities still running Windows 7, as end of life two-year countdown
begins
Despite 97% of local authorities being aware of Windows 7’s end of life in January 2020, nearly a
fifth (17%) are yet to plan a migration away from the operating system, a Freedom of Information Act
(FOIA) request has found. The research, which includes responses from 317 councils, highlighted
the fact that despite the issues encountered by those using legacy operating systems such as
Windows XP, not enough is being done to adequately prepare for life beyond Windows 7.
https://t.co/kAKAtJxGnV
2
© 2018 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Interesting FYI. Overall, the U.S. Internal Revenue Service (IRS) maintains over 20 million
lines of assembly code.
The Internal Revenue Service’s claims it needs more funding to address aging IT infrastructure; but
lawmakers say before the tax agency can ask Congress to show them the money, it must first show
appropriators a plan.
https://t.co/AOBqeH3e9V
IRS clutches its modernization holy grail
2018 could be the year the IRS crosses the final frontier in its 25-year modernization drive.
At the moment, the agency has a short-term crisis. It has to translate the complicated new tax law
into computer code. Its programmers must find all of the lines affected among millions of lines of
code. Their challenge is mainly time and scale. The agency does some code revision every year.
But the scope this year is much larger than anything since the Reagan-era tax reforms…plus the
underlying code has 36 more years’ worth of alterations preceding these changes. IRS also needs
new forms, new advisories, new instructions, and new training for its people.
https://t.co/X4ut5hwm3C
How T-Mobile is using containers in production to increase uptime and save money
After a year of running containers in production, T-Mobile recently felt comfortable enough before a
crowd of Seattle techies to give them a peek behind the curtain at its live production systems. T-
Mobile engineers showed attendees the monitoring dashboards of T-Mobile’s containerized
applications. They showed how T-Mobile can replicate its entire cloud infrastructure running in
Oregon on AWS servers over to the US-East region in about seven minutes, a process that could
take up to six hours for applications that aren’t running in containers.
https://t.co/m05NeKlAc8
What is a proxy server?
A proxy server is an intermediary server that functions via software on a computer to serve
information to the end user without revealing the identity of the person performing the lookup. This
could be a web page, a file, a connection or another type of request. When a request is usually
made to the Internet, the user’s identity (their IP address) is sent to the location of the information.
For example, if a search is made using Google, the user’s IP address is sent to Google so it knows
where to send the information back. Proxy servers are used to protect the requester and the
information source from each other by preventing this information from being shared.
https://t.co/g37q1qVjli
Edge Computing vs. Cloud Computing: What’s the Difference?
The term cloud computing is now as firmly lodged in our technical lexicon as email and Internet, and
the concept has taken firm hold in business as well. By 2020, Gartner estimates that a “no cloud”
policy will be as prevalent in business as a “no Internet” policy. Which is to say no one who wants to
stay in business will be without one. You are likely hearing a new term now, edge computing. One of
the problems with technology is terms tend to come before the definition. Technologists (and the
press, let’s be honest) tend to throw a word around before it is well-defined, and in that vacuum
come a variety of guessed definitions of varying accuracy.
https://t.co/ofaYPSDG1i
3
© 2018 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

How Just One Simple Human Error Almost Destroyed a Missile Submarine
The modern submarine is not a simple machine. A loss of propulsion, unexpected flooding, or
trouble with reactors or weapons can doom a sub crew to a watery grave. Also, it’s a good idea to
close the hatches before you dive. Call it a lesson learned for the Indian navy, which managed to put
the country’s first nuclear-missile submarine, the $2.9 billion INS Arihant, out of commission in the
most boneheaded way possible.
https://t.co/hBtfat3HwY
Russia Lost a $45 Million Weather Satellite Due to Human Error, Official Says
The loss of a $45 million Russian weather satellite last November was due to human error, a high-
ranking official said, because the satellite's programming was set for the wrong launch site. The
programming for the satellite, called Meteor-M No.2-1, included instructions based on the satellite
launching from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, east of Russia. Baikonur is a frequent
launch site for satellites and astronauts. However, Meteor-M launched from the new Vostochny
launch site in eastern Russian.
https://t.co/NDCvORJFaj
A rare look inside Apple’s expanding Reno data center
Like unicorn sightings and solar eclipses viewed from the same exact spot, getting an inside look at
an Apple data center is a rare occurrence. Chalk it up to trade secrets and other sensitive
information. That and the fact that you probably don’t want people tripping around a facility that hosts
crucial data for Apple’s various services. If you’re itching to see what it looks inside a facility that
makes it possible to send those iMessages or pester Siri with all sorts of questions, the Reno
Gazette-Journal recently had a chance to tour Apple’s Reno data center.
https://t.co/QP9saZCRyC
Incidents in Manchester and Wales mean NHS hit by two major IT failures in 24 hours
Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust said it was forced to postpone some operations and
rearrange some outpatient appointments following a four-hour outage at several of its sites in
January. The trust was forced to implement “well-rehearsed business continuity plans.” IT systems
were back up and running approximately four hours later.
https://t.co/pNnS7GTvAV
Data Center Uptime on the Line: What is Your Switchgear Doing?
Although generators offer backup in the event of a short power disturbance, optimal facility uptime
requires a reliable power distribution system – of which switchgear is the backbone.
https://t.co/2IzKfcsRKh
From Gravic Shadowbase: Switching Replication Engines with Zero Downtime and Less
Risk
Switching replication engines with zero downtime is a topic with immense complexity. In this paper,
we discuss how a data replication engine can be changed or upgraded without taking either the
application or the database offline.
4
© 2018 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

https://shadowbasesoftware.com/white-papers/2018/01/switching-replication-engines-with-zero-
downtime-and-less-risk/
Cloud service provider failure could cost $15bn, says Lloyd's
A new report from the Lloyd’s of London insurance and reinsurance market in collaboration with
catastrophe risk modeller AIR Worldwide reveals that businesses in the U.S. could lose as much as
USD $15 billion were a leading cloud service provider to experience a downtime of at least three
days. The new report, ‘Cloud Down – The Impacts on the US economy,’ utilises loss data for 12.4
million organisations in the U.S. and proposes a different approach to assist re/insurers’ ability to
model this type of risk, which, are inherently complex and far-reaching.
https://t.co/vZGYtaS58i
Admin automation: the serverless low-hanging fruit
Serverless computing in 2018 is about where cloud computing was in 2009. But what exactly does
serverless mean, and what are some easy ways to get started with it?
https://t.co/94Fct19SYC
Enterprise Blockchain Is Ready to Go Live in 2018
Last year saw a lot of blockchain experimentation in the form of PoCs and pilots in financial services,
supply chain and a number of other industries as well as government operations. For these to move
toward production in 2018, the technology needs to mature in key areas. But open source consortia
like Hyperledger and enterprise software vendors like Oracle are stepping up to the challenge to
deliver on these requirements.
https://t.co/8hBIj9bzS9
Heatwave triggers ‘Code Yellow’
A heatwave gripping southern Australia has put so much strain on the national power grid, some
Victorian hospitals have been forced to issue a “Code Yellow” alert amid fears of blackouts.
Victoria’s Department of Health has warned all Melbourne hospitals to check that their emergency
generators are working in case they lose power. A Department spokesman confirmed all Melbourne
hospitals were asked to check emergency and back-up power supplies. Some hospitals were forced
to issue a “Code Yellow” alert, which means that health services may be required to conserve
energy by turning off non-essential lights and equipment.
https://t.co/VGsoZcyvCC
The top 10 security challenges of serverless architectures
Serverless architectures, also known as function as-a-service (FaaS), are used in the enterprise to
both build and deploy software and services without the need for in-house physical or virtual servers.
This kind of architecture has proven popular due to inherent scalability and compatibility with cloud
services and includes AWS Lambda, Azure Functions, Google Cloud Functions, and IBM BlueMix
Cloud Functions. However, as noted in a new report by PureSec, it is not immune to the security
issue, which impacts more traditional server-based systems.
https://t.co/Y2KtwGXZfr
5
© 2018 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

HPE and NREL Take Steps to Create a Sustainable, Energy-Efficient Data Center with an
H2 Fuel Cell
As enterprises attempt to manage rising volumes of data, unplanned data center outages are
becoming more common and more expensive. Nationwide, 91 percent of data centers experienced
an unplanned outage during the past year. To combat this issue, Hewlett Packard Enterprise (HPE)
has teamed up with the National Renewable Energy Lab (NREL) with the goal of creating a
hydrogen-powered data center that is high-performing, extremely reliable, and energy efficient.
https://t.co/HgLmMFtHiC
The keys to modernizing legacy IT systems
The 2017/2018 Logicalis Global CIO Survey found that legacy systems were top of mind for many of
the 890 CIOs polled. Most of the CIOs surveyed say they’re focused on digital transformation, with
44 percent citing the complexity of legacy technology as their top obstacle. The survey also found
that 51 percent of CIOs plan to replace or adapt existing infrastructure as part of their digital
transformation efforts.
https://t.co/f2YML2LpJB
Lithium batteries becoming popular choice for datacenter UPS systems
Datacenters' demand for lithium batteries used in their uninterruptible power supply (UPS)
systems is expected to rise dramatically in 2018 as tech giants, including Google, Amazon,
Microsoft, Facebook and Hewlett-Packard Enterprise (HPE), are poised to adopt related solutions
for their server systems.
https://t.co/7Y22QrBXcE
NOAA Weather Forecasts Stick with CPUs, Keep an Eye on GPUs
The United States arguably did not invest enough in weather forecasting for many years; but NOAA
