Flash Boys: A Wall Street Revolt
May2014
“FlashBoys:AWallStreetRevolt,”authoredbyMichaelLewis,tellsthestoryofhowthe
U.S.financialmarkets thatwereoncestableandpredictable havebecomepredatoryby
feedingontheordinaryinvestorandhowagroupofdedicatedindividualssetouttocorrectthesituation.
Brad Katsuyama was a trader in equities for the Royal Bank of Canada (RBC). In 2002, he was
transferredbyRBCtoworkinitsNewYorkCitytradingoffice.
Brad’smainroleasatraderwastoprovideliquiditytothemarket.Hesatbetweenbuyersandsellerswho
wanted to trade large amounts of stock and the public markets where the volumes were smaller. For
instance, if a large pension plan wanted to sell three million shares of Intel, but the market showed a
demand for only one million shares, he would buy one million shares from the pension plan and
immediatelyresellitinthemarket.Hewouldthenworkartfullyoverthenextfewhourstounloadtheother
twomillionshares.
In the seven years of his trading career, he had trusted his trading terminals. If his trading screens
showed 10,000 shares of Intel offered at $22 per share, he could buy 10,000 shares of Intel at $22 per
share. In 2006, RBC decided to move to an electronic trading system and paid $100 million for a U.S.
electronic stock trading firm called Carlin Financial. Shortly after being forced to use Carlin’s technology,
Brad encountered severe problems in trading. His trading terminals were no longer reliable. If they
showed a market of 10,000 shares of Intel offered at $22, and he pushed the Buy button, the offers
vanished. He could buy perhaps 100 shares at $22, and then the price moved inexplicably up. It was if
themarkethadreadhismind.Hefoundthathisfellowtraderswereexperiencingthesameproblem
Hegatheredthecompany’s technologistsaroundhim andexplainedtheproblem Theirresponsewasthat
it was Brad’s fault, or it was because the market was too active. Brad ran an experiment to prove his
point. His trading terminal showed a total of 100,000 shares of AMD offered at $48 distributed between
the New York Stock Exchange, Nasdaq, the BATS electronic exchange, and the Direct-Edge electronic
exchange. He entered an order into his terminal to buy 100,000 shares of AMD at $48 per share. He
watched for several seconds, and the market didn’t move. He then hit the Enter key, and the offerings all
disappearedandwerereplacedwithhigheroffers.Someonewasreadinghismind,orsoitseemed.
Brad set out to build a team of people to investigate the cause of this and other anomalies in the stock
markets. The team designed a series of experiments, not to make money but to test theories.to answer
the question: Why was there a difference between the stock market displayed on his trading terminals
and the actual market? Why, when he went to buy 20,000 shares of Intel offered on his trading screens,
didthemarketonlysellhim2,000shares?
At the time, there were thirteen different stock exchanges operating in the New York City/New Jersey
area.Amajorcluecamewhentheteam foundthatifanorder wasroutedtoonlyoneexchange,theteam
was able to buy everything offered by the exchange. Furthermore, as they increased the number of
1
©2014SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

exchanges, the percentage of the order that was filled decreased. The more places from which theytried
tobuystock,thelesstheyactuallybought.
The team then tried a new experiment. They introduced delays into their order streams so that all orders
arrived at all exchanges at substantially the same time. Surprise! The orders were all executed at the
marketsofferedbytheexchanges.
It now became clear that certain traders were taking advantage of the team’s order arriving at one
exchange to beat that order to other exchanges that were further away time-wise. At these exchanges,
they would sell a small amount of the stock, thus driving the price down. When the team’s buy order
appeared,theywouldbuyatthereducedprice.Thedifferenceintimewasmeasuredonlyinmilliseconds,
but it was enough that a firm with an extremely fast trading engine could take advantage of. Bythis time,
thereweremanyfirmsthathadthiscapability–theywerethenewhigh-frequencytradingfirms(HFTs).
HFTs use special algorithms and extremely fast servers collocated with the exchange matching engines
to gain a speed advantage over other brokers. The practice that Brad and his team had discovered was
called front-running. An HFT would post small 100-share buy/sell orders for many stocks on multiple
exchanges. These orders were not meant to make money – they were intended to detect what other
brokers were doing. As soon as one of these test orders was executed, the HFT had a good idea that a
muchlargerblock wasbehindthetrade.Theywouldthen,atveryhighspeeds,executeagainstthatorder
on the other exchanges so that the original investor was faced with a market that had suddenly moved
against him. Though the difference in stock price might just be a penny or two, later calculations showed
thatthisamountedtobillionsofdollarsayeartakenoutofinvestors’pockets.
Brad and his team devised atrading enginethat attempted toequalizethetimeat which trades arrived at
various exchanges. Named Thor, the trading engine introduced delays in the paths to the various
exchanges so that the time for an order to travel to any exchange was the same. Thor was marketed by
RBC withsomesuccess.However,itwasplaguedbydifferencesinpropagationtimeoverwhichithadno
control. The nominal transit time for an order to some specific exchange might be ten milliseconds.
However, this time delay was subject to a great deal of variance depending upon which route the
common carrier was using at the time and the traffic load on the channels. The time delay could vary by
severalmilliseconds,thwartingThor’seffortstoreacheachexchangeatthesametime.
Further tests showed that the minimum time that it took to travel over a channel to an exchange was
about 450 microseconds. Therefore, the time difference between the arrivals of an order at different
exchanges had to be less than 450 microseconds. This could only be accomplished by running private
fiber channels from the firm’s trading engine to the various exchanges. It was determined that a 350-
microsecondwindowwouldbesufficienttoguaranteefairtradingbyeliminatingfront-running.
In January, 2012, Brad and several members of his team left RBC to build their own exchange based on
this insight. Named the Investor’s Exchange, they quickly decided to change the name when they saw
their URL – www.investorsexchange.com. The name of their new exchange became IEX. A core part of
the team was the “Puzzle Masters.” Theywere tasked to find everywayto break the exchange’s fairness
policiesandtodeterminedefensesagainstthesemethods.
When trying to raise capital to start IEX, the team discovered that there was a lot of resistance to the
concept, especially among the large Wall Street banks. The banks offered preferential rates to HFTs to
handletheirordersandmadesignificantincomefromfront-runningandotherpredatorypracticesthatIEX
sought to eliminate. However, the capital was raised, and IEX laid its private fiber network and built its
ownmatchingengine.
Inadditionto ensuring that marketpricingdata arrived atexternal points-of-presencesimultaneously,IEX
alsoinstitutedpoliciesthatavoidedotherpredatorypractices,including:
2
©2014SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

 Following a published set of rules in the exchange's computerized order matching engine. The
rules for order matching followed by many exchanges and large Wall Street banks were kept as
proprietaryinformation.
 Offering a limited number of simple and familiar order types. There were onlyfour –market, limit,
mid-point peg, and fill or kill. Over 150 order types existed at other exchanges, all meant to give
somefirmanadvantage.
 Charging afixed feeof 0,09cents per shareonmostorders (or a flatpercentage rate of 0.3% on
stocksworthlessthan$1pershare).Otherexchangeschargedawiderangeoffeesorevenpaid
fororderflowtoattractthetypeofordertraffictheywanted.IEXrefusedtopayfororderflow.
 Slightly delaying market pricing data to all customers so that no significant advantage can be
gained bya broker locating its computers in close proximityto the IEX exchange. Colocation of a
brokerwiththeIEXsystemswasprohibited.
 Limiting ownership to a group of "ordinary (non HFT) investors" who are required to route orders
through other brokers (who are not allowed to be investors in the company), which alleviates
manyconflict-of-interestissues.
IEX went into operation in October, 2013. During that month, it traded about 2 million shares. In April,
2014, its trading volume had skyrocketed to 57 million shares. This is still small compared to the big
exchanges, but IEX’s growth is on a path to make it an important exchange in the financial marketplace.
Thekeytoitssuccessistogetthebigbankstobuyintotheconceptofafairexchange.Sofar,Goldman
Sachshastakentheplunge.ItremainstobeseenifIEX’seffortstocreateafair marketplacewillsucceed
orifgreedwilltriumph.
This description has highlighted only one aspect of the predatory practices in today’s financial markets –
front-running. However, “Flash Boys” exposes a myriad of other practices, their impact on the normal
investor, and what IEX is doing to hopefully curb these practices. It is a comprehensive exposé of what
predatory practices today’s financial markets have subtly adopted, practices that are not understood by
evensophisticatedinvestors.
3
©2014SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com