Calculating Availability – Failure State Diagrams
September2007
In the previous articles in our Calculating Availability series, we have studied a variety of topics.
These have included failure probabilities, repair and recovery strategies, failover and failover
faults, environmental faults, and the interdependence of hardware and software faults. In all of
thiswork,wehavederivedaseriesofrelationsbasedonintuitivereasoning.
However, intuition is not always accurate. How realistic are these relationships? Have we been
led astray by inaccurate reasoning? It turns out that there is a very formal way to derive these
samerelationships.Thatisthroughfailurestatediagrams,whichwediscussinthisarticle.1
All of the relationships that we have presented in previous Geek Corner articles are based on
formal results achieved by analyzing failure state diagrams. Basically, having determined the
correct answers through a fairly laborious procedure – the state diagram, we then formulated
intuitive approaches to arrive at the same conclusions; and these are what we have been
presenting in our Geek Corner articles. Sometimes, we had to stretch a bit to explain intuitively a
certain result; and we may have left you feeling a little uneasy with the outcome. We hope that
thishasbeeninfrequent.
In this article, we explain the use of failure state diagrams. They are actually simple in concept,
butsometimes cantakesomemessyalgebra to solve.Wedemonstratethe use of this technique
withatrivialexamplethatprovesthatavailability, A,isrelatedtosystem MTBF(meantimebefore
failure)andsystemMTR(meantimetorecover)by
MTBF
A  (1)
MTBFMTR
Inlaterarticles,wewillusefailurestatediagramstoprovemoresignificantresults.
The Failure State Diagram
Afailurestate diagram is a graph in whichthe nodes represent the various failure states in which
the system can be, and the connectors are the rates at which the system will transition from one
statetoanother.For instance,Figure1shows asimplesystem thatcanbeintwostates–S and
1
S .TheprobabilitythatthesystemisinstateS isp ,andtheprobabilitythatitisinstateS isp .
2 1 1 2 2
While in state S , the system will transition to state S at a rate of r transitions per second.
1 2 1
Likewise, while in state S , the system will transition to state S with a rate of r transitions per
2 1 2
second.
1
W. H. Highleyman, P. J. Holenstein, B. D. Holenstein, Appendix 3, Failover Fault Models, Breaking the Availability
Barrier:SurvivableSystemsforEnterpriseComputing,AuthorHouse;2003.
1
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

r
1
S S
1 2
p  p 
1 2
r
2
SimpleFailureStateDiagram
Figure1
Inthesteadystate,theoutgoingtransitionrateforastatemustequaltheincomingtransitionrate.
For instance, consider state S . The outgoing transition rate for state S is the probabilitythat the
1 1
system will be in state S , which is p , multiplied by the outgoing transition rate from state S ,
1 1 1
which is r . Therefore, the outgoing rate from state S is (p r ). Likewise, its incoming transition
1 1 1 1
rate from state S is the product of the probability that the system is in State S , which is p , and
2 2 2
the transition rate from state S , which is r . Therefore, the incoming transition rate to state S is
2 2 1
(p r ).Thus,inthesteadystate,
2 2
p r =p r (2)
1 1 2 2
AsimilaranalysisforstateS resultsin
2
p r =p r (3)
2 2 1 1
Notice that Equations (2) and (3) are two equations with two independent variables, p and p .
1 2
Therefore, in principle, they can be solved to find p and p . However, Equations (2) and (3) are
1 2
identical and therefore do not lend themselves to a solution. This is true of all state diagrams. If
there are n states, there will be n state equations, such as Equations (2) and (3). However, there
will be only n-1 independent equations since any one of these n equations can be derived from
the other n-1. One more equation is needed to break this impasse, and that is the simple
observation that the system must always be in one and only one state at any given time.
Therefore,thestateprobabilitiesmustsumtoone:
p +p =1 (4)
1 2
Using Equation (4) as the other independent equation, Equations (2) and (4) can now be solved
tofindthestateprobabilities.FromEquation(2),
p =p r /r (5)
1 2 2 1
FromEquation(4),
p =1–p (6)
2 1
Thus,substitutingthevalueforp giveninEquation(6)intoEquation(5),wehave
2
p =(1-p )r /r
1 1 2 1
or
p =r /(r +r ) (7)
1 2 1 2
SubstitutingthisvalueintoEquation(2),wehave
p =r /(r +r ) (8)
2 1 1 2
2
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

NotethattheseprobabilitiesadduptooneasrequiredbyEquation(4).
We now know the probabilities that the system will be in state S or in state S in terms of the
1 2
transition rates. For instance, if the system will transition from state S to state S once per
1 2
secondwhenitisinstateS (r =1),andifitwilltransitionfromstateS tostateS ninetimesper
1 1 2 1
second when itis instate S (r =9),then the probabilitythat it willbe instate S , p ,is 90%;and
2 2 1 1
theprobabilitythatitwillbeinstateS ,p ,is10%.
2 2
Bytheway,notethat thetransitionrateoutof astateis theinverseof theamountof timethatthe
system spends inthatstate.If thetransitionratefromstateS ,r ,is onceper second,this means
1 1
that the system will remain in state S for an average of one second. Likewise, if the transition
1
ratefromstateS ,r ,isninetimespersecond,itwillremaininstateS for1/9thofasecond.
2 2 2
Single System Failure
So far, failure state diagrams may seem a little abstract. Let us correct that with a simple
example. Let us apply Equations (7) and (8) to the trivial case of a single system with a mean
time before failure of MTBF and a mean time to recover of MTR. Let state S be the state in
1
whichthesystemisoperationalandstateS bethestateinwhichthesystemisfailed.
2
1/MTBF
up down
p  p 
1 2
1/MTR
SingleSystemFailureStateDiagram
Figure2
Since the transition rates are the inverse of the time spent in a state, the transition rate out of the
up state is 1/MTBF; and the transition rate out of the down state is 1/MTR. With respect to
Equations(7)and(8),wehave
r =1/MTBF
1
r =1/MTR
2
Then,fromEquations(7)and(8),wehave:
1/MTR MTBF
probabilitythatthesystem isup p   (9)
1 1/MTBF1/MTR MTBFMTR
1/MTBF MTR
probabilitythatthesystem isdown p   (10)
2 1/MTBF1/MTR MTBFMTR
These are the definitions of availability, A, and the probability of failure, F. Using the simplifying
assumption that MTBF >> MTR (which is certainly the case for the systems in which we are
interested),theserelationscanbewrittenas
1 MTR
A p  1 (11)
1 MTR MTBF
1
MTBF
3
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

MTR
Fp  (12)
2 MTBF
Equations (11) and (12) are the simplified forms of the availability equations that we have been
using.
Application to Availability Issues
Inournextarticle,wewillapplyfailurestatediagramstotheimportantcaseofmultinodesystems
withdualredundancy.Wewillconsidertwodifferentrepairstrategies:
 Parallel repair, in which there are multiple repair people available to work simultaneously
onallfailednodesinthesystem.
 Sequential repair, in which there is onlyone repair person so that onlyone failed node at
atimecanbeserviced.
Inlater articles, we willconsider systems with anon-zerorecoverytimeandtherelativeimpactof
hardwareandsoftwarefailures.
4
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
