Ponemon on Live Threat Intelligence
November2013
Ponemon Institute conducts empirical studies on critical issues affecting the
management and security of sensitive information about people and organizations. It has recently
completed a study on the value of live cyberthreat intelligence for combating cyberattacks. Live
cyberthreat intelligence refers to intelligence data about actual cyberattacks happening now. It is
delivered with no delay, as compared to delays ranging from minutes to days and even weeks for many
cyberthreatmonitoringfacilities.
The Ponemon study was based on a survey of 708 users. Thirty-five percent of the users were technical
staff. Management staff (supervisors, managers, directors, vice presidents) represented 58% of the
responses.
Over fourteen industry segments were included. The largest was financial services (19%), followed by
healthandpharmaceutical(12%),publicsector(12%),andretail(9%).
The Ponemon study shows that the average cost to large organizations for defending cyberattacks is
aboutUSD$10millionperyear.Iftheseorganizationshadaccesstolivethreatinformation,theyestimate
thattheycouldsave40%ofthiscost,orUSD$4milliondollarsperyear.
Wesummarizethekeyfindingsofthereportinthisarticle.
Optimum Age of Actionable Intelligence
Companies that were successful in stopping cyberattacks as they were occurring said that the optimal
age of threat intelligence was less than 4.6 minutes. Companies that had a history of not stopping
cyberattacksfeltthat12.1minuteswassatisfactory.
Companies say that, on average, they need at least ten minutes notice to stop an attack. However, 57%
ofcompaniessaythattheirintelligenceistoooldtoactuallythwartanattack.
Key problems with dealing rapidly with threat intelligence are that it is difficult to share the intelligence
withkeystakeholdersinatimelyfashionandmuchoftheintelligenceisfalsepositives.
Clearly, speed and accuracy are of the essence. The value of live threat intelligence ages very rapidly.
Falsepositivescosttimeandmoneyandleadtocomplacency.
Success Rate of Cyberattack Defenses
Twenty-three percent of companies reported thattheyhadsuccessfullydefended againstallcyberattacks
in the last two years. Sixty-two percent stated that they failed to prevent one or more security exploits in
1
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

the last two years. Thirty-three percent of companies stated that they were successfully attacked nine
timesormoreinthelasttwoyears.
Theaveragenumberofsuccessfulattackswassixoverthetwoyearperiod.
The Most Serious Attacks
There are a wide range of cyberattacks that are carried out against companies. The most feared is
advanced persistent threats (APT) that engage in a long-term pattern of sophisticated hacking attacks.
In close order behind APTs are root kits (installing malware at the operating system level), and SQL and
codeinjection.
The most lethal attackers are criminal syndicates, followed by malicious insiders and state sponsored
attackers.Hactivistsandlone-wolfhackersareatthebottomofthelist.
The countries that currently represent the most active attackers are the United States followed by China
and states in the Russian Federation. However, this demographic is expected to change. In the future,
theprimaryattackerswillbeChina,theRussianFederation,andthentheUnitedStates.
Are Attacks Even Detected?
Sixty-five percent of companies believe that their organization has been a target of cyberattacks. Only
34% believe that it is unlikely that they have ever been attacked. Thirty-five percent of these companies
say that their attack estimates are based on intuition. 23% of companies say that their organizations rely
uponpreciseintelligence.
The lack of knowledge about whether their websites, networks, or other systems were compromised puts
organizations at an elevated risk with respect to the effectiveness of cyberattacks against them. Thirty-
seven percent of companies saythat theywould unlikelyknow of such an event. Only10% of companies
say that they would know with certainty when an attack had occurred. For those who felt that they can
detectanattack,itwouldtakeanaverageofelevendaystodeterminethatacyberattackhadoccurred.
The Importance of Live Intelligence
It was felt by 63% of the companies that live intelligence is very important to achieving a strong
cyberattack defense. However, they rate their ability to gather and to analyze live cyber intelligence very
low–about4onascaleof1to10(10beingthehighest).
The majority of respondents (59%) felt that big-data analytics was the solution to handling the mass of
liveintelligencedatathatcanbegenerated.
Theintelligencefeaturesthatareconsideredtobemostimportanttodealwithcyberattacksinclude:
 Clearandconcisereportssothatquickactioncanbetaken.
 Communicationbasedonriskpriorityorlevelofcompromise.
 Integratingintelligence informationwith enablingtechnologies such as SIEM(securityinformation
andeventmanagement)appliances.
 Expeditedintelligencereportsonceacompanyknowsthatithasbeentargeted.
 Non-disruptiveintelligenceinformationreporting.
 Trenddatasuchasthefrequencyofattacksincludedintheintelligenceinformation.
 Distributionofintelligencereportstopeoplebasedontheirneedtoknow.
 Captureofcorroboratingintelligenceinformationfromexternalsources.
2
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

IT Security Budget
The average IT budget of the respondents was USD $95 million, and USD $13 million of this budget was
allocated to IT security. Of the security budget, about USD $3 million was spent on intelligence about
cyberthreats.
Companies spent an average of USD $10 million per year to resolve the impact of cyberattacks. This
includes out-of-pocket expenditures, productivity impact, legal costs, and reputational damage.
Companies estimated that if they had actionable intelligence on an occurring cyberattack within 60
secondsofthecompromise,theycouldsaveUSD$4millionper year.
The Importance of Managing Threat Information
The success that a company has of stopping a cyberattack depends to a great deal on how effective is
theirthreatintelligenceandhoweffectivelytheymanageit.Companies’successatthwartingcyberattacks
dependsuponhowtheyhandletheircyberintelligence,asshowninthefollowingtable.
ComplywithFunction?
Yes No
Function: %Successful %Successful
Organizeintelligencebasedonperceivedthreats 49% 24%
Effectiveatgatheringliveintelligence 65% 36%
Effectiveuseoftechnologiesprovidingintelligence:
Securityexploitsstopped 85% 69%
Highlevelofcertaintyabouttargetedattacks 63% 30%
Seeintelligence-gatheringactivitiesaseffective 97% 64%
Summary
The Ponemon study demonstrates the importance of having timely intelligence to stop a cyberattack.
However, the majority of respondents agree that it is hard to stop an attack on enterprise systems
because the threat intelligence is out of date. Furthermore, the high rate of false positives deters staff
frompursuingtherealthreatsandattacks.
Thestudyshows thattheeffectiveuse of enablingtechnologies suchas SIEMappliances can leadtothe
prevention of security exploits and a greater understanding of the types of cyberattacks to which the
companyisbeingsubjected.
This study was sponsored by Norse Corp. (www.norse-corp.com). Norse’s synchronous global platform
continuously collects and analyzes real-time, high risk Internet traffic to identify the sources of
cyberattacks. Their system protects against today’s most advanced cyber threats including zero-day and
advancedpersistentthreats.
3
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com