Hurricane Harvey’s Hit on Houston Spurs NextGen 911
September 2017
As Hurricane Harvey flooded Houston with over forty inches of rain in late August, 2017,
damaging over 40,000 homes, Houston residents in trouble did what they are trained to
do – they called 911. But the emergency number struggled with the high rate of calls. At
the peak of the storm, the service received 80,000 calls in a 24-hour period. The normal number of calls
during such a period is 8,000.
Many people were unable to get through. Those that did were often put on hold while a recording
promised that someone would be with them shortly.
Like most 911 systems, Houston’s is based on telephone land-line technology. There are thirty 911
centers in the county containing Houston, the largest 911 operation in Texas and one of the largest in the
country. Call takers took turns pulling twelve-hour shifts and sleeping in the building during the hurricane
– there was no other option. Rerouting calls to 911 centers outside the system is not technically feasible
because of the legacy telephone technology.
Next Generation 911 systems (NextGen 911) would make it easy to quickly shift calls to other counties. It
also supports SMS text messaging, a boon when hold times are long and battery power is a precious
resource.
Current 911 Systems
Around the world, we depend upon emergency numbers for critical police, fire, and medical support.
Virtually every country has one or more emergency numbers. In the United States, Canada, Mexico, and
many Latin American countries, the emergency number is 911.
Emergency calls are answered by telephone operators or dispatchers. If a call is answered by a
telephone operator, the operator will determine the appropriate dispatcher to which to route the call. It is
the dispatcher’s responsibility for getting the appropriate emergency services to the site.
When a dispatcher receives a call, he or she must be provided with all
of the emergency information and the location of the nearest available
emergency vehicles so that appropriate dispatch instructions can be
issued. Most emergency call systems (certainly the larger ones) are
dependent upon computer-aided dispatch (CAD) systems. These can
be large server farms (or virtualized farms) providing multiple
applications, such as computer-based telephony, computerized radio
control, automatic number verification, location mapping, automatic
Stratus Technolgies 1
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

emergency vehicle location, and real-time access to dispatch logs and police, fire, rescue, motor-vehicle,
and court records.
The first 911 system went into operation in the United States in 1968. Since then, the term “911” has
become synonymous with public safety. The formal name for an emergency call center like the U.S. 911
centers is Public Safety Answering Point (PSAP). There are currently over 6,000 PSAPs in the United
States, handling an estimated 240 million 911 calls per year.
Next Generation 911 Systems
The current 911 services are based on telephone communications. The receiving operator or dispatcher
obtains the details of the emergency from the caller and arranges for emergency services to be
dispatched. If the call is from a land line, the address of the caller is generally known. If the call is from a
mobile phone, typically only the approximate location is known; and the actual address must be obtained
from the caller.
However, with the advent of smart phones, much more information is now available. Callers can
communicate via text. They can take still photos and videos showing more detail of the emergency. It is
estimated that currently over one-third of 911 calls originate from wireless devices, and the expectation is
that this percentage will continue to grow.
The next generation of CAD systems, dubbed NextGen 911, will allow CAD systems to receive, capture,
and route digital communications such as photos and text messages received from virtually any
communications device to dispatchers and emergency responders. For instance, a caller could take a
picture of a tanker carrying hazardous material that is involved in an accident. The photo could be relayed
to dispatchers so that they know in advance the type of hazardous material they will be dealing with and
can dispatch the appropriate emergency equipment to the site.
If Houston Had NextGen 911
If Houston’s 911 system had been upgraded to NextGen 911, people in trouble could have gotten through
to dispatchers much faster via text messaging. They would have been able to send photos of their
situation to help first responders in their rescue. They would not have been put on hold while operators
worked through the backlog of waiting calls.
I anticipate that Houston’s experience and the experiences of others as they were affected by hurricanes
such as Irma and Maria will hasten the adoption of NextGen 911. The benefits are well worth the costs.
Acknowledgement
Information for this article was taken from the following source:
Houston area copes with flooding as Harvey delivers pounding rainfall, CNN.com; August 27, 2017.
Harvey highlights issues of aging 911 tech, Money.CNN; September 1, 2017.
2
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman
