– Our July Twitter Feed of Outages
July 2017
A challenge every issue for the Availability Digest is to determine which of the many
availability topics out there win coveted status as Digest articles. We always regret not
focusing our attention on the topics we bypass. With our new Twitter presence, we don’t
have to feel guilty. This article highlights some of the tweets that made headlines in
recent days.
Millions of PCs hijacked by major Chinese malware attack
According to extensive research from the Israeli cyber-security firm Check Point, a Chinese digital
marketing company called Rafotech has infected millions of computers worldwide with adware that
redirects user traffic to fake search engines. The fake search engines then divert their search
queries through Google and Yahoo's affiliate programs to earn a commission for the company
behind the adware. So far, Rafotech has infected over 250 million computers, according to a rough
estimation from Check Point.
https://t.co/YHdrxJjeiJ
What is ‘legacy IT’ and how scared should we be of it?
Everyone agrees that modernization of U.S. Federal IT infrastructure and systems is necessary, and
the swift passage of the Modernizing Government Technology Act will help. But one area of
disagreement is the viability of “legacy” technology and what exactly should be done about it. The
government has been reporting that 75 to 80 percent of the Federal IT budget is spent on running
legacy (or existing) systems
https://t.co/V8M2455925
Case Study: Jumping from Legacy Systems to Modern Controls
The hurdle faced by many plant operators when upgrading their factories is on the approach. How
do you attempt to update your legacy systems? Do you shut down your facility or try to upgrade and
continue to manufacture product? Should you keep your legacy equipment or invest in brand new
hardware? Recently, a case study released by Rockwell Automation highlighted how a research
laboratory underwent an expansion where it encountered this particular dilemma.
https://t.co/oOgfgeIsNG
1
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Despite massive reliance on GPS, there's still no Plan B if it crashes
It only took thirteen millionths of a second to cause a whole lot of problems. Last January, as the
U.S. Air Force was taking one satellite in the country’s constellation of GPS satellites offline,
an incorrect time was accidentally uploaded to several others, making them out of sync by less time
than it takes for the sound of a gunshot to leave the chamber. The minute error disrupted GPS-
dependent timing equipment around the world for more than 12 hours. But last January’s system
failure brings up an often-ignored question: What if all these flying clock radios were wiped out, and
everything on the ground started blinking 12:00?
https://t.co/3wja1Gs4gQ
VA to use same electronic health record system as military
The Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) will replace its legacy electronic health record system with
the same commercial system currently used by the U.S. military. The move to modernize the VA's
information technology systems recently was announced by VA Secretary David Shulkin, who said
the department will move from its existing VistA system to the commercial Military Health System
(MHS) Genesis system currently used by the Defense Department. The move means that veterans’
electronic records will follow them after they retire from the service.
https://t.co/sYDpPj0O6r
British Airways was grounded by computers—now the airline needs to look to the cloud
After its IT systems failed in May, British Airways suffered a major power outage that left more than
75,000 passengers stranded for days at Heathrow and Gatwick airports and clocked up a reported
$150 million in compensation costs. Over the ensuing week, the company attempted to salvage its
reputation after heavy criticism of its crisis management plans, which appeared to constitute little
more than providing yoga mats to stranded passengers. It seems that BA’s lack of vision with its
yoga matt distribution crisis management ‘plan’ was mirrored in its approach to its IT systems. Much
has been made of the company’s decision to lay off hundreds of IT workers in its software
department last year and outsource many of these jobs to India. The problem, however, may be
more fundamental; a dated infrastructure that needs rapid updating.
https://t.co/e0Ts69mfkn
It's not just you—there's a widespread Google Home outage
Google spent a lot of time at the Google I/O Conference talking about Assistant and Google Home.
In fact, it gave a free Home to everyone who attended I/O. Now, a lot of those devices are spitting
out errors instead of controlling smart home devices and answering questions. According to multiple
online complaints, there's a Google Home outage affecting a significant portion of users. You'll know
instantly if your Home is affected. Use the trigger phrase and it'll respond with "Hmm, something
went wrong. Try again in a few seconds," or "There was a glitch. Try again in a few seconds." Most
users say the issues started popping up in the last day or two—I began getting errors last night, and
today Google Home has a nearly 100% failure rate.
https://t.co/wrMxTKZNyK
2
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Understanding IBM i Options for High Availability
There are many options when it comes to high availability (HA) for IBM i. Should you use logical
replication software like MIMIX or a hardware-based solution like PowerHA? Should you deploy to
the cloud or stay on premise? Is remote journaling the way to go, or should you roll your own? IT
decision-makers must do their homework if they’re going to find the right solution for them.
https://t.co/wqDKVyNPsB
First Utility-Scale Microgrid in U.S. Enters Service
Ameren Corp. has completed a $5 million microgrid at its Technology Applications Center adjacent
to the University of Illinois campus in Champaign, Ill. The facility is one of the only utility-scale
microgrids in the United States that serves live customer loads on an actual utility distribution feeder.
If the grid-connected electric distribution line fails or is knocked out by a storm, the Ameren microgrid
is intended to seamlessly transition to island mode and provide 180 residences and 12 commercial
buildings with power from dedicated wind, solar, and natural gas resources, backed up by a bank of
lithium-ion batteries.
https://t.co/xGYXL3CcGh
Massive, Six-Story Data Center in a Norwegian Mine Comes Online
An abandoned mine-turned data center in Norway opened in May and claims to be “the largest
green data center in Europe.” Its first two tenants are IBM and the German industrial conglomerate
Friedhelm LOH Group. Situated within a deep fjord—much like the neighboring Green Mountain
facility at Stavanger—the servers are cooled using seawater cooling systems. The saltwater brought
from the depths of the fjord is 45 degrees and cools less corrosive fresh water. The fjord water
remains pressurized and requires little energy to pump, eliminating the need for costly high-capacity
equipment.
https://t.co/avYU079vZa
Bridgestone modernizes data center, hauls out 13 tons of copper wire
In 1968, tire-making giant Bridgestone Corp. opened a data center in Akron, Ohio. If walls could talk,
this data center could tell the story of IT. That center opened on Oct. 9, 1968, with racks and racks of
tapes and a water-cooled mainframe. Under the raised floor was more history. There were water-
cooling lines dating from the late 1960s and evidence of successive waves of technological change,
mostly in the form of copper wiring. Physical servers were moved in and out of the data center over
the decades, but the older, connecting tech under the floor wasn't all removed.
https://t.co/ejaZgauNXb
British Airways IT engineer blamed for outage
British Airways pinned the blame for its £150 million ($272m) IT meltdown on a single worker who
rebooted the system too quickly when the power failed. The engineer allegedly failed to follow proper
procedure at a Heathrow data centre and caused "catastrophic physical damage" to servers, leaving
75,000 stranded across the globe,
https://t.co/JQ3zWm0NOu
3
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

An Availability Digest Oldie but Goodie: "The Dawn of Fault Tolerant Computing"
In 1980, I published a four-part series in Computerworld entitled “Survivable Systems.” The articles
described the state-of-the-art fault-tolerant systems at the time. The need for systems that never (at
least, hardly ever) failed was just being recognized. Several companies jumped in with their own
versions of fault-tolerant systems, including Tandem, Stratus, Synapse, Auragen, August, NoHalt,
Parallel Computers, and Tolerant Systems. A lot has changed over the 36 years. Systems have
become more “open,” with Linux-like operating systems and x86-based hardware architectures.
However, what hasn’t changed is the need for systems that never fail.
https://t.co/JFyDtIJLTY
Legacy IT is the least of a bank’s problems
It’s too late now to turn around the whole legacy IT system of a bank. Each and every bank the
author has met burns ridiculous amounts of money trying to make legacy IT work; but so far, nobody
has really transformed. Systems are down, projects take forever, IT is always held up by something
other than making problem-solving solutions for customers, and the story goes on. Ironically, the
core functions of a bank are ridiculously simple. The complexity grows mainly out of the lack of
knowledge. Most people inside banks do not know how their systems actually work.
https://t.co/dIaFrMi1ot
Building High Availability for industrial and embedded systems
High Availability (HA) is not just for the data center. While the principles of achieving extreme uptime
have been honed by enterprise IT teams, it’s just as important for industrial and embedded
applications, which are often deployed in mission-critical environments. By understanding and
leveraging HA principles perfected in the enterprise environment, industrial and embedded servers can
be made more robust, reliable, and resilient.
https://t.co/HaDZEDrlsj
Data Centers Have a Key Role in IT Infrastructure
Despite the growing presence of the cloud, the majority of IT assets are still deployed at enterprise-
owned data centers, according to the Uptime Institute's seventh annual "Data Center Industry
Survey." The findings reveal that flaws within the cloud provider evaluation process may be
contributing to this trend. Many organizations are, in fact, still addressing data and application
storage demands with new data center construction rather than with cloud migrations or colocation
space investments. Data center outages still come with the territory, but most tech departments are
getting to the bottom of downtime by conducting root-cause analyses of incidents as well as
measuring their impact on costs.
https://t.co/H3GSlpCgOG
4
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

What Can You Do to Not Be Like British Airways?
While the forensic analysis of the recent British Airways outage is still some time away, the airline's
woes are a good reminder of why we need robust systems in place to protect the systems and data
that underpin our businesses. While cyber-threats pull the headlines, they aren't the biggest causes
of business disruptions. Natural disasters, hardware failure, software failure and corruption, human
error are far more prevalent than malware and hackers. So what can we do to mitigate the risks of a
British Airways type of incident in our businesses?
https://t.co/I6jsbyDcZb
From BA to the NHS: why the UK needs to seriously step up its IT game.
Another week another UK IT headline. A ‘power outage’ at British Airways caused the UK’s national
carrier to cancel worldwide flights at the start of the UK May bank holiday. The WannaCry
ransomware attack brought much of the National Health Service to a halt. Events like these expose
once again the importance of IT systems in today’s business. But this should not be the only lesson
to take. Such incidents highlight the complexity and the sheer number of vulnerabilities in critical
infrastructure sectors such as the NHS, airlines or telecom operators caused by complex software.
It’s simply all about complexity.
https://t.co/qdScc2cLaB
"Killing COBOL: The Massive Mistake Everyone Wants You to Make"
The world runs on mainframes. Sure, pure-play digitals may live on the cloud—but their partners, the
world’s biggest banks and insurance companies as well as government agencies, trust their
systems-of-record exclusively to COBOL on IBMz Systems. So even when you flag a ride on Uber,
you trigger a mainframe transaction. The status quo for so-called “legacy” code, however, is no
longer acceptable. Existing mainframe applications simply can’t be modified quickly enough to keep
pace with the relentless demands of the digital marketplace. Should you pull the plug on your
mainframe and re-platform your critical systems of record or invest in mainframe Agile and DevOps?
https://t.co/JwFFPr6zVz
-
Meg Whitman Says HPE Has to Reconsider This Business
For the second quarter in a row, Hewlett-Packard Enterprise chief executive officer Meg Whitman
said that one part of the company's business—which sells servers to major cloud and
telecommunications providers—was slammed by lower sales to a "single tier one" customer.
Whitman, again, attributed lower-than-expected server sales to declining orders from a single
customer, which she never identified but that others have reported is Microsoft. But this time,
Whitman said that HPE has to think about whether it even makes sense to stay in that business.
https://t.co/U2TQmMbJOC
5
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Israeli ‘Solar-Power’ Tree Is Charging up a Small French Town
An Israeli company is charging up a small French town with a solar-powered eTree that allows
residents to power their phones, sit in the shade or enjoy free Wifi. In May, the Sologic eTree,
created by Israeli entrepreneur Michael Lasry and designed by Israeli artist Yoav Ben Dov, was
“planted” in the central French town of Nevers for its population of 37,000 to enjoy. The project,
made of solar panels shaped like leaves, is the first to be installed in Europe, with other prototypes
operating in 10 Israeli and American cities.
https://t.co/TQEh5X84Xs
Tidal energy turbine with Lockheed Martin Technology deployed off Scotland
Atlantis Resources Limited has deployed the first AR1500 tidal energy turbine with new Lockheed
Martin (LMT) technology off the coast of Scotland. The installation is the latest development in the
MeyGen project designed to harness the motion of the tides to provide clean, sustainable,
predictable power for up to 175,000 homes in Scotland.
https://t.co/zm9hqao2ek
BBC News - What went wrong at BA?
As British Airways (BA) began to recover from a disastrous IT failure, an inquest already was under
way into what went wrong and why it took so long to fix it. Some questions: Why did a power failure
