Pandemic Response Planning for Businesses
October2009
The Fall flu season is coming, and with it is coming the particularly aggressive H1N1 Swine Flu
(which has nothing to do with pigs).With widespread vaccinations planned, perhaps it will be just
a ripple. Or perhaps it will be a tidal wave, sickening millions of people. For most, it will not be a
fatalattack;buttopreventthespreadofthedisease,contagious workersshouldstayhomesoas
not to spread the infection to their fellow workers. Other workers may elect to stay home to care
forillfamilymembersorchildrenwhoseschoolshaveclosed.
If your company suddenly lost 50% of its work force for several weeks due to such a pandemic,
how would you survive the event? The one thing that is guaranteed is that if you haven’t planned
for such a disaster, survival may be quite painful. The cost to your business due to reduced
productivity, lost customers, and even employee moral when paychecks aren’t cut can be
significantlyreducedifyouarepreparedthroughproperplanning.
Planning for a pandemic is complicated by the fact that it can strike at any of your company’s
operations, depending upon the degree of infection in each department. You can’t predict which
departmentswillbeincapacitated,butyoucanhaveacontingencyplanforeach.
To guide you through this complex planning process, eBRP Solutions, a company focused on
Business Continuity Management tools, has made freely available its guide to pandemic
response planning.1 This detailed guide provides a template that takes you through all of the
phases of proper pandemic response planning. It has been used by commercial, government,
and non-profit organizations around the world,2 including the Information Technology Disaster
RecoveryOrganizationoftheU.S.InternalRevenueService’s(IRS).
In this article, we take a peek at the topics through which the guide takes you in creating an
effective pandemic plan. As you will see by the detail of the plan, it is not a simple exercise. But
thereisnothingsimpleaboutsurvivingadisastersuchasapandemic.
Planning Phases
ThePandemicResponsePlanguideisseparatedintofourphases:
 Assessments–Theanalysisoftheriskstowhichyoumaybeexposed.
 Planning – The development of risk mitigation, contingency strategies, and business
policiestohelpdealwiththeresultsofapandemic.
1
PandemicResponsePlan,eBRPSolutions;July2009.
http://www.ebrp.net/documents/R3FluPandemic.pdf
2NoPandemicPlan?It’sNotTooLatetoGetStarted!,DisasterRecoveryJournal;October1,2009.
1
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

 Response – The development of strategies for dealing with the impact of the pandemic
atbothorganizationalandoperationallevels.
 Restore–Aformalprocessforreturningtonormalfollowingthepandemic.
Assessments
Identifytherisksofapandemicandtheirimpactoncompanyfunctions.
RiskAssessment
A risk is a threat to which a business function has some degree of vulnerability. Risks can affect
markets,profits,customers,employees,andotherareas.
 Employee risks: What impact will a pandemic have on your employees? Plan for
absences, and set guidelines for vaccinations and face-to-face contact. If contractors are
used,theimpactonthemshouldbeconsideredaswell.
 Customer and market risks: Is the demand for your products or services likely to
diminish as the result of a pandemic? Alternatively, you might find that the need for your
offeringsincreases.Maybeyou’reinhealthcare,ormaybeyourcompetitorscan’tdeliver.
 Supply chain risks: Analyze the impact of each supplier’s inability to perform for your
organization.
 Location risks: Risks might be greater for multitenant facilities or facilities that involve
intensive customer personal contact. Are any of your facilities in public buildings that
mightbeclosedduetoapandemic?
 Process risks: Is a function of your business threatened if manpower is reduced? If
suppliersfailtodeliver?Ifalocationshouldbeclosed?
 Insurance:Whatinsuranceisinplacetomitigatetheeffectsofanyoftheaboverisks?
ImpactAnalysis
A pandemic will affect the availability of human resources rather than of facilities. What will the
impact of a reduction of human resources be on customers and corporate financials? Are
regulatoryrequirementsanissue?
 Customer impacts: The demand for your products may decrease. Your ability to
respond to customer needs may be impacted. Alternatively there may be an opportunity
toincreaseyourmarketshareincertaincases.
 Financial impacts: What is the estimate for reduction of profits, margins, return on
investment,cashflow,andotherfinancialmeasures?
 Regulatoryimpacts:If youcan’tmeetyourregulatoryrequirements,whatfines mightbe
imposed?Whatbusinessrestrictionsmightbeimposed?
Planning
Ifyoudon’tknowwhenapandemicwilloccur,if youdon’tknowhowlongitwilllast,orif youdon’t
knowhowsevereitwillbe,planfortheworst.
SetPriorities
Determinewhatyourgoalsare.
 Protectingyourfinancials.
2
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

 Protectingyourcustomers.
 Protectingyouremployees.
 Protectingyourreputation.
 Obeyingregulations
CreateaHealthyWorkplace
Create a working atmosphere that promotes health and minimizes the risk of spreading the
disease. How do you communicatethese plans?Whathealthsupplies should youprovide?What
aboutfoodhandling?Face-to-facemeetings?Visitors?Travel?
 Education: Provideeducation for your employees and their families.Covering your nose
and mouth with tissue, frequent washing of hands, and avoiding close contact with
infectedpeoplearesomeoftheissues.Aboveall,stayhomeifyouaresick.
 Communication: Determine how your educational points will be communicated.
Company newsletter? Bulletin boards or signs? Company web site? Paycheck stuffers?
Discussionswithmanagement?
 Supplies: Provide employees with whatever supplies are necessary to prevent the
spread of the disease throughout the workplace. Anti-bacterial hand cleaners, tissues in
meetingrooms,latexgloves,andfacemasksaresomeexamples.
 Dealing with fear: How do you answer employee questions? Don’t let them depend on
rumors.
 Counseling: Protect the mental health of your employees. Use whatever resources
might be available, such as your employee benefits program or local health agency
counseling.
EmergencyCenterOperations(ECO)
An ECO should be established to monitor attendance levels and to shuffle manpower to critical
functionsfromlesserones,aswellastoinvokeothermitigationstrategies.
ManpowerIssues
A succession plan should be formulated to ensure continuityof management. Cross-training may
benecessary.
 Succession planning: It is estimated by the U.S. Center for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) that 40% of all people will be infected by a flu pandemic. Can you
tolerate the loss for days or weeks of 40% of your management? Every manager should
haveadesignated,trained,backup.
 Cross-training: In addition to mangers, identify critical employees whose skills are
needed for business continuity. These skills may include certifications, subject matter
expertise, unique knowledge of manual processes, or important customer or vendor
relationships. Some other employee should be cross-trained to take over the impacted
functionshouldacriticalemployeebecomeabsent.
 Workload changes: In extreme cases, such as loss of sales, it may become necessary
to reduce the workforce to save the company. Understand the applicable laws, and plan
thepoliciesandprocedurestolayoffworkers.
 Travel restrictions: Determine what travel should be restricted. What if the government
restricts travel? Can you relocate employees to other facilities not impacted by the
pandemic?
 Educate Employees: Keep your employees up-to-date on the pandemic situation, how
to recognize symptoms, what to do about familyhealth, and companypolices concerning
thepandemic.
3
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

SetEmploymentPolicies
Consider what changes should be made to absentee policies. Under what circumstances must
employees use personal or sick days for absences? How will secondary absences (for instance,
staying at home to care for a sick family member or to take care of children whose schools have
beenclosed)behandled?Reviewtelecommutingpolices.
WorkwithSuppliers
Identifythe suppliers that are mission-critical to your organization, including essential utilities and
services.Considermodifyingexistingcontractstoincludepandemiclanguage.
 Criticalsuppliers:Determineaspectsofthesupplierrelationshipsthatmaybesubjectto
negotiation to mitigate the effects of a pandemic. Review Service Level Agreements
(SLAs).
 Singlepointsof failure: Identifythosesuppliers who,if theyfail to deliver their goods or
services, could cripple or shut down your business. Identify alternate suppliers and
initiaterelationswiththem.
 Utilities and public services: Public services such as power, water, snow removal, and
garbage collection may be single points of failure. Select alternate providers and
determinewhatguaranteestheycanprovide.
 Contracts: Examine existing contracts to determine exclusivity rights, delivery
requirements,servicelevelagreements,andforcemajeureclauses.
ImproveCustomerAccessibility
When a pandemic hits, one-to-one relationships with customers may dissolve into more diffuse
relationships.
 Access to products and services: What can be done to streamline customer services
and remove some of the human intervention needed to satisfy your customers’ goals?
Onlinetransactions?Drive-thruwindows?Extendeddeliveryservices?
 Access to information: Prepare a customer information web site, complete with FAQs
(frequently asked questions). Implement an online chat function to communicate with
customers. Decentralize call centers to mitigate the effects of reduced manpower at a
centralcallcenter.
InsuranceCoverage
Review your current insurance coverage to make sure that key-man insurance is adequate, that
you are protected from lack of performance due to a pandemic, or if a customer, vendor, or
employee contracts the disease. If you are self-insured, consider what coverage may best be
shiftedtoaninsurer.
CommunicationsPlan
Establish a Pandemic Communications Team to plan methods for information dissemination and
toacceptfeedback.
 Keep Up-to-date: Establish a Research Team to keep current on the state of the
pandemic.
 Publiccooperation:Participatewithlocalhealthagenciesandemergencyrespondersin
their planning processes. Let them know what assets or services your company can
