Configuring to Meet a Performance SLA – Part 3:
Single Server with Exponential Response Time
February2009
Many applications carry with them a performance Service Level Agreement (SLA) that specifies
the response times that they must achieve. After all, if an application’s response time is so slow
thattheapplicationisnotuseful,theapplicationis,ineffect,down.
The performance requirement is often expressed as a probability that the system’s transaction-
responsetimewillbelessthanagiveninterval.For instance,“Whenhandling50 transactionsper
second,98%ofalltransactionsmustcompletewithin500milliseconds.”
In Part 1 of this series, we derived the basic average response-time expression for a single-
serversystem.InPart2,weextendedthatresulttoamultiserversysteminwhichmultipleservers
workoffacommonworkqueue.
We now show how to size a system to meet a performance SLA. If service time is exponentially
distributed, the solution to this question is straightforward. If service time is not exponentially
distributed, the solution is more complex and involves the Gamma Distribution. In this part, we
explore exponentially-distributed service times. In Part 4, we will extend this to servers with
generalservice-timedistributions.
First,wereviewtheresultsofthefirsttwopartsofthisseries.
Reviewing the Average Response Time for a Single Server
InPart1, weshowedthattheaverageresponsetimefor asingle-server system was givenbythe
Pollaczek-Khintchineequation:
T
T  s [1(1k)L] (1)
r 1L
where
T istheaveragetransaction-responsetime.
r
T istheaverageservicetimeoftheserver.
s
L istheloadontheserver.
k isthedistributioncoefficientoftheserver’sservicetime.
Thedistributioncoefficient kdependsupontheprobabilitydistributionoftheserver’sservicetime.
For instance, k = 1 applies to server distribution times that are random (that is, exponentially
distributed),whichisthecommonassumption.1Inthiscase,Equation(1)reducesto
1Morespecifically,kis1/2theratiooftheservicetime’ssecondmomenttothesquareofitsmean.
1
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

T
T  s , (2)
r (1L)
which for many of you is the well-recognized expression relating transaction-response time to
serverload.
Ask becomessmaller,responsetimeforagivenloaddecreases.Foruniform distributiontimes,k
= 2/3. For constant distribution times, k = 1/2. The response-time/load relationship for different
service-time distributions is shown in Figure 1, which plots transaction-response time normalized
toservicetime(T /T )asafunctionofload.
r s
12.00
10.00
k=1
8.00
k=2/3
T r/T s 6.00 k=1/2
4.00
2.00
0.00
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Load
Single-ServerTransactionTime
Figure1
Reviewing the Average Response Time for a Multiserver System
The calculation of response time for a multiserver system is more complex. In a multiserver
system,several likeservers process transactions from acommonwork queue. Examples of such
servers are Web farms and transaction-processing monitors, such as Tuxedo and NonStop
Pathway,thatdistributetransactionstoapoolofservers.
Using c to reflect the number of servers in the multiserver system, Figure 2 shows transaction-
response time normalized to service time (T /T ) as a function of load for multiserver systems
r s
using 1, 2, 4, 8, and 16 servers. The improvement in response time as servers are added is
clearlyshown.
6.00
5.00
c=1
4.00
T/T 3.00
r s 2
4
2.00
8
16
1.00
0.00
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1.0
Load
MultiserverTransactionTime
Figure2
2
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Note that response time flattens out as more servers are added. Therefore, a multiserver system
can be loaded more heavily than a single-server system. However, care must be taken as this
means that the response-time/load curve breaks much more rapidly as the number of servers is
increased.
ReferenceismadetoPart2fortheexpressionsgoverningmultiserverresponsetimes.
Determining the Average Response Time Needed to Meet an SLA
We now turn our attention to determining what average response time we need in order to meet
anSLArequirementsuchas“At50transactionspersecond,98%ofalltransactionswillcomplete
within 500 msec.” Knowing the average response time, we can calculate the load that can be
carriedbytheserverandstillmeettheSLA.
There are two distinct cases – the case of exponentially-distributed service times and the more
general case of general service-time distributions. In this part, we consider servers with
exponential service times. In Part 4, we will discuss servers with general service times, of which
exponentialservicetimesareaspecial(andveryimportant)case.
ExponentialServiceTimes–SingleServer
The cumulative probability distribution for the response time of a server with exponential service
timeis2
P(T t)1et/Tr (3)
r
where
T istheresponsetime.
r
t isatimevariable.
P(T <t) istheprobabilitythatT <t.
r r
We are interested in the probability that the response time, T, is less than some maximum
r
responsetimeT .Thus,wecanrewriteEquation(3)as
m
PP(T T )1eTm/Tr (4)
r m
whereT isthemaximumallowableresponsetime.
m
Thatis,theprobabilitythattheresponsetime,T,willbelessthanT is P,whereweusetheterm
r m
PtorepresentP(T <T ).
r m
WecansolveEquation(4)fortheresponsetime:
T /T ln(1P) (5)
m r
AsshowninEquation(2),weknowthatforaserverwithexponentialresponsetime,
T
T  s (2)
r (1L)
2
TheexponentialdistributionandthePoissondistributionarebothpropertiesofarandomdistributioninwhicheventsare
independentofeachother.SeeHighleyman,WilburH.,Chapter4,BasicPerformanceConcepts,PerformanceAnalysis
ofTransactionProcessingSystems,Prentice-Hall;1989.
3
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

where
T istheaverageservicetimeoftheserver.
s
L istheloadontheserver.
Thus,
ln(1P)
mT /T  (6)
m s (1L)
wheremisthemaximumresponsetime,T ,normalizedbyT .Pcannowbewrittenas
m s
P= P(T <mT )
r s
Thatis,Pistheprobabilitythattheresponsetimewilllessthanmtimestheservicetime.
Given the specification that we would like P of all transactions to be completed in less than m
service times, we can calculate from Equation (6) the server load that will allow us to meet this
specification:
ln(1P)
L1 (7)
m
This relationship is shown in Figure 3 for various values of m. For instance, if 95% of all
transactions (P) are to complete in less than six service times (m), we can load the server up to
50%. That is, if the service time is 10 msec., the average response time will be 20 msec.
[Equation(2)];and95%ofalltransactionswillcompleteinlessthan60msec.[Equation(7)].
1.0
0.9
10
0.8
8
0.7
6
0.6
4
Load 0.5
3
0.4
0.3
m=2
0.2
0.1
0.0
0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
Probability (T <mT )
r s
Allowable Load To Meet Performance SLA
Figure 3
Figure 3 is useful if the server is already chosen, and one must determine how much load it can
carryand still meet the performance SLA. In the above example, with a service time of 10 msec.
andaloadof50%,theservercanhandle50transactionspersecondandmeettheSLA.
However, if one is insteadtryingto decide how fastaserver mustbe,therequired service timeis
ofmoreinterest.Notingthat
4
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

LrT (8)
s
whereristhetransactionrate,wecanrewriteEquation(6)as
ln(1P)
T /T 
m s (1rT )
s
Solvingfortheservicetime,T ,wehave
s
T
T  m (9)
s rT ln(1P)
m
Givena transaction rate, r, aprobability, P,and amaximum allowableresponse time, T , we can
m
determine how powerful a server we need in terms of what its average service time, T must be.
s,
For instance, in our previous example, if at 50 transactions per second (r), 95% (P) of all
transactionsmustcompletewithin0.06seconds(T ),theaverageservicetimeoftheservermust
m
be10milliseconds.
There is one important observation to be made, and that is that there are certain SLA
specifications that simply cannot be met if service times are exponential. This can be shown by
noting that the server will perform its fastest under zero load. Under zero load, Equation (6)
becomes
mln(1P) (10)
This is plotted in Figure 4. For any given value of m, the probability P that the response time will
belessthanmT cannotexceedthevalueabovetheloadline.
s
1
0.9
increasingload
load=0
P 0.8
0.7
0.6
0 2 4 6
m
BestPerformanceatZeroLoad
Figure4
Forinstance,thebestperformancethatonecangetoutofaserverwithexponentialservicetime
is
 63%ofalltransactionswillcompleteinlessthanoneservicetime.
 86%ofalltransactionswillcompleteinlessthantwoservicetimes.
 99.3%ofalltransactionswillcompleteinlessthanfiveservicetimes.
5
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

If a server with a service time of 50 msec. is being used, and if the SLA calls for 90% of all
transactions to be completed within 100 msec. (m = 2), this specification cannot be met with this
server.Afasterserverisrequired.
ExponentialServiceTimes–MultiserverSystems
There is a very important property of multiservers with exponential service times: their response
timesarealsoexponentiallydistributed.3Specifically,
If one or more servers with exponential service times are driven from a common queue
with Poisson-type arrivals, the outputs from that queue are Poisson-distributed with the
departurerateequaltothearrivalrate.
Therefore, the general concepts discussed above apply to multiserver systems, except that the
relationship between response time, T, and service time, T , is a function not only of the load on
r s
theserversbutalsoofthenumberofserversinthemultiserversystem.
InPart2,wenotedthatthisrelationshipisgivenby
k(cL)c
T  p T T (11)
r c(c!)(1L)2 0 s s
wherep ,theprobabilitythatthequeueisempty,isgivenby
0
1 c1(cL)n (cL)c
 
p n! c!(1L)
0 n0
and
cisthenumberofserversinthemultiserversystem.
Part2includesaspreadsheettocalculatethisresponsetime.Thisspreadsheetcanbefoundat
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0401/performance_sla.xls.
Intermsofouranalysisabove,Equation(5)stillholdsandisrepeatedhereforconvenience:
T /T ln(1P) (5)
m r
However,convertingthistoreflectservicetime,T ,isnotsostraightforwardsinceT isrelatedto
s s
T byEquation(11)above.Theproceduretouseisasfollows:
r
1) Given P and T from the SLA specification, find the average allowable response time
m
fromEquation(5):
T
T  m (12)
r ln(1P)
2) Knowing the service time, T , of the servers under consideration and the number of
s
servers,c,inthemultiserver system,useEquation(11) todeterminethe loadthat canbe
tolerated. This can be done as an iterative calculation using the Part 2 spreadsheet
referencedabove(whichitselfisaniterativecalculationdonebyExcel).
Noting that Equation (11) reduces to Equation (2) for c = 1, this two-step process is what was
combinedintoasinglestepforthesingle-servercase,resultinginEquation(7).
3T.L.Saaty,pg.12-3,ElementsofQueuingTheory,McGraw-Hill;1961.
6
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Let us use our previous example as an illustration. Let us assume that we are using an 8-
processor multiserver system with each processor having an average service time, T , of 10
s
msec.Wewant 95% of all transactions to complete within a time, T , of 60msec.From Equation
m
(12), we find that the allowable average response time, T, is 20msec. Iterating Equation (11) via
r
the Part 2 spreadsheet referenced above, we find that we can impose a load of 91% on the
servers in the multiserver system and still achieve a 20 msec. response time. We can load the
single server only 50%. Thus, each server in the multiserver system can process a transaction
rate that is approximately 80% higher than a single server. With eight servers in the system, this
systemwillhaveacapacity14.4timesgreaterthanthatofasingleserver.
We must note one caution here. It might be tempting to think that we can get by with smaller
servers in the multiserver system and still achieve a 20 msec. response time. If these eight
servers each had a service time of 144 milliseconds instead of 10 msec., would that not give the
multiserver system the same capacity as a 10-msec. single server system? The answer is yes,
buttheresponsetimewouldbe14.4times slower.95% of alltransactions wouldcompleteinless
than864msec,not60msec.ascalledforbytheSLA.
Summary
UsingFigure3,wecannowanswerthequestionastohowmuchwecanloadasingleserverand
meetanSLArequirementthatPofalltransactionswillcompleteinlessthanmservicetimes.The
spreadsheetfoundat
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0402/performance_sla_3.xls
can be used to make this calculation [Equation (7)]. Alternatively, this spreadsheet also provides
asectiontocalculatetheservicetimeneededtohandleagiventransactionrateandstillmeetthe
SLAspecification[Equation(9)].
For multiserver systems, the spreadsheet of Part 2 can be used iteratively to relate service time
toresponsetimeinordertorespondtotheSLAspecification.
In our next part, we will extend these techniques to the problem of servers with general service-
timedistributions.ThisiswherewewillmeettheGammadistribution.
7
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
