Verisign DDoS Mitigation Services
December2013
Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks are increasing in frequency and size. The
number of DDoS attacks increased over 50% from 2011 to 2012. Of more concern is
their size. The volume of malicious traffic generated by a DDoS attacker has grown from five gigabits per
second(Gbps)toover300Gbpsinthepastyear.
This volume of malicious traffic cannot be handled by the ordinary organization. The only reasonable
defense is to turn to a cloud-based DDoS mitigation service that can spread the malicious traffic across
severaldatacentersandreturncleansedtraffictothevictim.
Verisign provides cloud-based DDoS mitigation services. We look at the DDoS
attackchallengeandVerisign’ssolutionsinthisarticle.
What is a DDoS Attack
A DDoS attack floods a web site with so much traffic that it is unable to provide reasonable responses to
its users. These attacks can cripple an organization’s entire online operation, from email to e-commerce.
Thisthreatensanorganization’sabilitytocarryonitsbusinessandmaydamageitsbrand.Inadditiontoa
poorcustomerexperience,thedowntimecausedbyaDDoSattackcanhaveseverefinancialpenalties.
SuccessfulDDoSattacksarenotjustamatterofcreatingsomuchmalicioustrafficthattheorganization’s
networkbandwidthisconsumed.Thoughthisiscertainlyonemethodofattack,thereareseverallayersof
attacks that are more sophisticated.1 DDoS attacks can be launched at different layers of the Internet
stack. In addition to consuming bandwidth, attacks can force an application to consume resources by
floodingitwithrequestsforapparentlylegitimateservices.
For instance, a SYN flood with spoofed client addresses requests connections witha server bysending it
aSYNmessage.Theserverassignsresourcestothependingconnectionandresponds withaSYN-ACK
message. However, neither the attacker nor the spoofed sender ever sends an ACK message to
complete the connection. The server holds its connection resources for several minutes before releasing
them. Ultimately, the server runs out of connection resources and cannot respond to further connection
requestsfromlegitimateusers.
AnHTTPfloodmakeslegitimaterequestsofawebsite,suchas downloadingawebpage.Ultimately,the
attacker has either consumed all of the web server’s connections or has put such a load on the web
serverthatitcannotrespondtoanyfurtherrequests.
1AnatomyofaDDoSAttack,AvailabilityDigest;April2013.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0804/ddos_anatomy.pdf
1
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

These are just a sampling of DDoS attack methods used by hackers. DDoS attacks are now in the
province of amateurs.Publiclyavailabletools allow anyoneto launch aDDoS attack againstatarget web
site.
The high volume of traffic is generated by botnets. A botnet is a collection of infected computers
controlled byabotnetmaster.Uponcommandfrom themaster,thecomputers in the botnet bombardthe
victim system with the master’s attacks of choice. Targets include web servers, DNS servers, application
servers, routers, firewalls, and network bandwidth. Publicly available tools and information-sharing sites
make it easy for an attacker to learn from each successive wave of attacks what defenses the victim is
deployingandtoplanfurtherattackstoavoidthesedefenses.
TherearemanyreasonsforDDoSattacks.Unliketypicalmalware,thepurposeofaDDoSattack isnotto
steal data or to redirect the actions of a computer. Rather, DDoS attacks may be launched for activism,
forrevenge,forcompetitivebranddamage,orforextortion.
The second half of 2012 saw a series of major attacks against U.S. banks that were launched by
activists.2 An Islamic group calling themselves the Izz ad-Din al-Qassam Cyber Fighters attacked several
major banks over the offensive video entitled “Innocence of Muslims” that had been posted on YouTube.
They vowed to continue the attacks until the video was removed. They launched a second wave of
attacks a few months later. These attacks were the largest seen up to this point, lasting a day or more
andgeneratingabout70Gbpsofmalicioustraffic.
Theninearly2013, the largestDDoSattack ever seen was launched against Spamhaus,acompanythat
specializes increatingablack listofspammers usedbyISPs andcorporations toblock spam.Spamhaus
added CyberBunker to its list.3 In retaliation, CyberBunker launched a massive DDoS attack against
Spamhaus. Three-hundred Gbps of data were directed at the Spamhaus web sites, and the attack lasted
several days. Spamhaus managed to survive the attack by using the cloud-mitigation services of
CloudFare,whichalsowasattackedbyCyberBunkerinretaliation.
Current DDoS Defenses
A survey conducted by IDG Research Services that polled 160 IT and network technicians and line-of-
business executives found that two-thirds had experienced at least one DDoS attack in the last year, and
11% had been attacked six times or more. About half of the respondents were using on-premises
appliances suchas firewalls andintrusion-detectiondevices tothwartDDoSattacks.Less thanhalf of the
respondents were confident that they could detect a DDoS attack. Even fewer felt that they could defeat
one.
TherearefourtypicalapproachestoDDoSprotection:
 Do-it-yourself – Increase bandwidth or write scripts to try to filter bad traffic. This approach is
simplebutgenerallyineffective.
 Specialized on-premises appliances – These appliances sit in front of servers and routers to
detectandfilter malicious traffic.Theyarecostlytobuyandtooperate,requireconstantattention
tokeepcurrent,andcannotdefendagainstvolumetricattacks.
 Rely on the ISP – ISPs have more bandwidth than individual organizations. However, many
organizations use multiple ISPs to avoid a single point of failure, and attack traffic is difficult to
manageifitisdistributedacrossmultipleISPs.
2IslamicHacktivistsAttackU.S.Banks,AvailabilityDigest;October2012.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0710/bank_attacks.pdf
DDoSAttacksonU.S.BanksContinue,AvailabilityDigest;January2013.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0801/more_bank_attacks.pdf
3History’sLargestDDoSAttack?,AvailabilityDigest;April2013.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0804/spamhaus.pdf
2
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

 Use cloud-mitigation providers – Cloud-mitigation providers provide massive amounts of
bandwidth at multiple sites around the Internet. They scrub malicious traffic and send only clean
traffic to the victim. Cloud-mitigation providers incorporate several mitigation strategies and can
identifyattacktacticstodeterminetheoptimumdefensestrategytouse.
Preparing for a DDoS Attack
More and more companies are realizing that it is when, not if, a DDoS attack is going to happen. There
areseveralimportantstepsthatshouldbetakentodetectandmitigateanattack.
 Gather proper metrics so that a DDoS attack can be distinguished from other malfunctions that
may be affecting the system’s performance. Appropriate metrics include inbound and outbound
traffic, server metrics (CPU load, network and disk activity, memoryusage, etc.), top URLs being
requested,andHTTPtoHTPPSratios.
 Define a clear escalation path.What tools are in place to alert pertinent personnel? Who is to be
contacted for mitigation service? Notify upper management and support and customer service
personnelthat an attack is underwayandthattheremaybea potentialoutage. Anoutages email
listisagoodplacetostart.
 Providelayeredfilteringofmalicioustraffic.Filteringforbandwidthfloods,SYN-ACKfloods,HTTP
floods, and other attack tactics are all different. Filters should be in place to protect against any
knownDDoSflood.
 Addressapplicationandconfigurationissues.DDoSattackersareexcellentatdetectingproblems
in applications, particularly those concerning performance tuning and configuration. Do
application load testing to see that networks and databases are configured optimally. Check that
thereareenoughconnectionsavailableforthewebservers.
 Protect your DNS system.4 This is probably the most overlooked of all recommendations since a
company’s DNS system is largely transparent to developers and operations personnel. DNS
systems are a very common target of DDoS attackers. If a company cannot resolve the
addressesofitswebsites,noonecanreachthesesites.
Cloud-Based DDoS Mitigation Services
Simply increasing bandwidth to survive a DDoS attack is no longer an acceptable solution. DDoS
malicious traffic must be spread across multiple cooperating data centers that are configured to handle
massiveattacks.
Furthermore, filtering malicious traffic has become a very complex task requiring the skills of specialists.
Asnewattack tacticsarediscovered,newfiltersmustbedevelopedandputinplace.Thisisacontinuing,
complicated,andcostlyundertaking.
These observations lead to the importance of cloud-based mitigation services. The advantages that a
cloud-basedservicebringstoDDoSmitigationaremany:
 Cloud-mitigationserviceprovidersprovidemultipledatacenterswithmassiveamountsofnetwork
capacitycapableofdistributingmassiveDDoSattacksacrossmanydatacenters.
 They invest in skilled personnel dedicated to the task of staying abreast of the latest security
threatsandassaulttactics.
4SurvivingDNSDDoSAttacks,AvailabilityDigest;November2013.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0811/secure64.pdf
3
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

 TheyprovidemultiplelayersoffilteringforallkindsofDDoSattacks.
 They provide monitoring services to quickly detect a DDoS attack so that defenses can be put in
placebeforethecompanysuffersanoutage.
 TheyprovideDNShostingservicestoprotecttheDNSsystemsfromattack.
 TheyprovideeffectiveDDoSprotectionona24x7basis.
Some companies who are considering cloud-mitigation services have some concerns that should be
addressed before following this path. One is the security of data being transmitted to and from the cloud
duringanattack.Theotheristhecompatibilityofthecloudwiththecompany’sexistingtechnology.
DDoS Mitigation by Verisign
Verisign has for fifteen years operated the infrastructure for a portfolio of top level domains, including
.com,.net,.tv, .edu,.gov, .jobs,.name,and.cc.More tothe point of this article, it alsooffers cloud-based
DDoSmitigationservicesandmanagedDNSservices.
Verisign provides two complimentary DDoS defensive services – DDoS Monitoring Service and DDoS
MitigationService.Though eithercanbepurchasedseparately,fullDDoSprotectionisonlyavailable with
thejointuseofbothservices.
VerisignDDoSMonitoringService
Verisign’s DDoS Monitoring Service provides via a single Dashboard a view of traffic activity and traffic
patterns across a company’s entire network.This view is continuallymonitored by Verisign’s experienced
professionals for signs of unusual activity, giving them the capability to quicklydetect a DDoS attack and
toinitiatemigrationstrategies.
The Monitoring Service collects sample packets from switches, routers, and other devices to establish a
baseline of normal traffic. These traffic measurements are sent to a correlation engine for threat
detection,alerts,andreporting.TheclientcompanyhascontinualaccesstoVerisignDDoSspecialistsfor
advice,questions,andinvestigationsofunusualtrafficdetectedbythecompany.
Verisigncontinuallyanalyzesattackpatternsaroundtheworldtoidentifyemergingattackstrategies.
VerisignDDoSMitigationService
When malicious traffic is detected, harmful traffic is redirected to a Verisign mitigation site. If the Verisign
DDoS Monitoring Service is being used, Verisign will detect the attack and will redirect traffic to its site. If
the client is not using the Monitoring Service, the client company is responsible for detecting the attack
andforreroutingitstraffictoaVerisignmitigationsite.
Redirectionrequires theavailabilityof aDNSserver to resolvethecompany’s URLs andtochangetheIP
addresses from the company’s web sites to ports on Verisign’s mitigation data centers. Thus, the
protection of a company’s DNS system is paramount to effective DDoS attack mitigation. The use of
Verisign’s managed DNS services is one option to ensure a functioning DNS system when an attack
begins.
At the Verisign mitigation site, specialist DDoS teams scrub the redirected traffic to remove malicious
content and to return cleansed traffic to the client web site. Scrubbing traffic is accomplished via the use
of layered filters as described earlier. Manyof these filters are Verisign’s proprietaryfilters, and some are
third-partyfilters.
4
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

By filtering malicious traffic, Verisign stops cyberattacks before they have a chance to affect the online
operations of the victim company. The Verisign DDoS Mitigation Service eliminates the need to over-
provisionnetworkbandwidthtokeepupwithincreasingattackvolumes
VerisignBestPractices
Insummary,VerisignprotectsacompanyfromDDoSattacksviaasetofbestpractices:
 Itprovidescentralizeddatamonitoringthatshows an enterprise’sentirenetwork trafficpatternsin
oneplacesothatDDoSattackscanbequicklydetected.
 Itprovides a network of largedata centers withmassive network andcomputecapacityto handle
anysizeofaDDoSattack.
 It builds in scalability and flexibility in its networks and data centers to make sure systems will
performproperlyunderattacks.
 It employs experienced researchers with hands-on experience dealing with botnets, recognizing
malicious traffic, defending against DDoS attacks, and changing mitigation tactics rapidly to
combatchangingattacktactics.
 Ituseslayeredfilteringtoreturncleantraffictotheclientcompanywithminimumlatency.
 It ensures that there is a clear escalation path to involve pertinent corporate personnel as an
attackprogresses.
 ItprovidesmanagedDNSservicestoensurethatacompany’swebsitescanalwaysbereached.
 Itworkswithitsclientcompaniestoaddressapplicationandconfigurationissuesthatwouldmake
iteasyforanattackertotakedownanapplication.
 Ithelpsitsclientcompaniespreparefordowntimebytestingcontingencyplansforshortandlong-
termoutages
ACaseStudy
A leading online retailer experienced a crippling DDoS attack on its two main ecommerce web sites. It
was unable to ward of the attack using its onsite in-house systems and services. It called on Verisign for
attack mitigation and rerouted all of its traffic to Verisign’s global cloud-mitigation network. At this point, it
hadrestoreditsownnetworkbandwidth.
The attack came in multiple waves. It began as a SYN-ACK attack with a network volume of 250 Mbps.
Oncethe attacker becameawarethat this attack was beingsuccessfullydefended,it increased the traffic
volumewithinthirtyminutesbyanorderofmagnitudeto2.3Gbps.
As mitigation of this attack becamesuccessful,theattackers shiftedtoHTTPfloods that attemptedtocall
up web pages from the company’s servers. When Verisign rendered these attacks ineffective, the
attackers turned to SSL attacks that targeted encrypted credit-card transaction traffic. Verisign engineers
determined that the attackers were making malformed requests inside the SSL payload and quickly
updateditsmitigationfilterstodroptheserequests.Atthispoint,theattacksstopped.
This case study shows the importance of Verisign’s massive network capacity, the power of its layered
filteringtechniques,andtheimportanceofaskilledstafftomakeswiftchangestodefensestrategies.
5
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Summary
DDoS attacks are on the rise in both frequency and size. It is imperative that companies be prepared for
aneventualattack,asthequestionisnolongeriftheywillbeattackedbutwhentheywillbeattacked.
There are several things that a company can do to prepare itself to defend against a DDoS attack on its
online services, including increasing its bandwidth and investing in a variety of defensive appliances
within its data center. However, with the increasing size of DDoS attacks, it is becoming more likely that
theseapproacheswillproveinadequate.
The best strategy is to arrange with a cloud-mitigation service provider to be available to take over
defense against an attack if the company’s own defenses become overwhelmed. The company’s
compromised traffic is sent to the data centers of the cloud-mitigation provider, and the provider returns
clean traffic to the victim company. Verisign’s cloud-mitigation services are an excellent example of the
benefitsofacloud-mitigationdefenseagainstDDoSattacks.
Acknowledgements
In addition to the previously referenced papers, information for this article was taken from the following
Verisignwhitepapers:
WhatisaDDoSAttack?
DDoSAttacksThreatenEveryEnterprise
FiveStepstoPrepareforaDDoSAttack
ThwartingDDoSAttackswithCloudDefenses
DDoSMonitoringService
DDoSMitigationService
6
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com