Active/Active Versus Clusters
May2007
In our previous issues of the Availability Digest, we focused heavily on active/active
architectures. But there is another, very important high-availability architecture, one, in fact,
that is far more mature and predominant than active/active systems, That architecture is
clusters. In this article, we describe the cluster architecture and compare it to active/active
systems.
What is a Cluster?
A cluster is a set of interconnected servers that present a single-server interface to its users.The
servers can back each other up, so in the event of a server failure, the functions of the failed
serveraretransferredtoasurvivingserver.
Similar recoveryfacilities areprovided for the databaseandfor thenetwork.Theuser is unaware
ofanyofthiscomplexity.Allauserseesisasingleserverimagesatisfyinghisneeds.
More specifically, a cluster comprises two or more
public
active standby
servers, or nodes, that can connect to a common
node1 node2
database. In general, only one node at a time, the
data
private appl base private active node, can operate on the database.
Otherwise, database corruption can occur caused
heartbeat
bytwoserverstryingtoupdatethesamedataitem
virtualIP at the same time. It is important that both servers
address
be the same. Clustering with heterogeneous
serverscanbeterriblycomplex.
There are, in fact, two types of databases in a
cluster. Public databases are accessible by
multiple nodes in the cluster and hold the
application databases. Each server also has a private database, which holds all of the software
requiredforthatservertooperatewhenitisnottheactiveserver(i.e.,itisastandbyserver).
One interesting question is where should the application executables reside? If they are resident
onthepublic database,thereis noversioncontrolproblem.Theentirecluster is always usingthe
same version of the application. However, if upgrades are to bemade to install a new application
version,theentireclustermustbebroughtdown.
Iftheexecutablesareinsteadstoredontheprivatedatabases,onenodeatatimecanbebrought
down to upgrade its version of the application and then returned to service without having to take
downtheentirecluster.Ofcourse,inthiscase,theclustermustbeabletohandleoperations with
differentapplicationversions;buttheupgradecanberolledthroughallofthenodesonebyone.
1
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Redundancy of the public database is as important as server redundancy in order to guarantee
high availability. To protect against a database fault, either RAID disk arrays (RAID 5 typically) or
mirrored disks (technically RAID 1) are used to hold the database. In either case, the database
will survive one physical disk failure, though mirrored disks will have a higher availability since
thereareonlytwodiskstofailratherthanfiveorsixasinatypicalRAID5configuration.
In order to be truly highly available, the networks through which the nodes communicate with
each other and with the users mustalso be redundant. Then, in the event of a network failure, all
trafficcanberoutedovertothesurvivingnetwork.
There is generally a failover management system that monitors the health of the cluster and that
initiatesfailoveractions.1
ClusterResourceGroup
Actually, it is not a server that fails over. It is an application. In large systems, a server might be
running many applications. A fault might affect onlyone application, and therefore it is necessary
onlytofailoverthatapplicationtoabackupserver.Theoriginalservercancontinuetosupportits
otherapplications.
Each application has its own IP addresses, which are used by the users to access application
services.When an application is failed over, its IP addresses are remapped to the new server so
thatfurtherrequestsaresenttoitinitsnewhome,transparentlytotheuser.
An application comprises three components – its application code, its database, and its IP
addresses.Thissetofcomponentsforanapplicationisknownasaservicegroup.2Whenthereis
afailure,itistheservicegroupsthatarefailedover,nottheserversthemselves.
When a service group fails, it may leave behind data corruption. This is because data has been
left behind in cache memory and not written to disk. Therefore, the database must be recovered
toeliminatecorruptionbeforeitcanbeused(forinstance,scandiskinWindowsorfschinUnix).
Following a service group failure, there may be an attempt to restart the application. Should that
fail, recovery by failover may be initiated. The failover of a resource group generally takes a few
minutes as the application is started (unless it is already up), the database is recovered, IP
addressesareremapped,andthenewactiveapplicationconnectstoitsdatabase.
Heartbeats
The center of a cluster’s high availability is the heartbeat. The servers (or the applications)
exchange heartbeats periodically to inform each other of their health. Should a standby server
thatisbackingupacurrentlyactiveserverorservicegroupnotreceiveatimelyheartbeatfrom its
activecompanion,itwilldeclarethatentitydownandwillinitiateafailover.
It is extremely important that the heartbeat network be highly available. Should the heartbeat
network be lost, both servers will declare the other server down and will attempt to assume
control of the applications, thus operating in so-called split-brain mode. As a result, both will
attempttowritetothedatabaseandasaresultmaycorruptthedatabase.
Therefore, the heartbeat network is generally a directly connected redundant network between
theservers.
1
Seeourproductreview,HP’sServiceGuardClusteringFacility,inthisissueoftheAvailabilityDigest.
2
HPcallsthisapackage.
2
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

ClusterConfigurations
Therearethreepredominantconfigurationsforclusters:
public public
active standby failed active
node1 node2 node1 node2
data data
private appl base private private base appl private
heartbeat heartbeat
virtualIP virtualIP
address failure address
Active/Standby
public public active
active active failed
node1 node2 node1 node2
A A appl
private appl B appl private private B A private
A B appl
heartbeat heartbeat
B
IPA IPB IPA
failure IPB
Active/Active
public public active
active active failed
node1 node2 node1 node2
data data appl
private appl base appl private private base A private
A A appl
heartbeat heartbeat
A
IPA IPB IPA
failure IPB
Parallel Database
3
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Active/Standby, in which one server backs up another. The standby server is either idle, or it
can be used to run some noncritical applications which can be immediately terminated in the
event of an active server failure. Active/standby configurations can include multiple standbys
backingupmultipleactiveservers.
Active/Active, in which each server in the cluster is running different critical applications and
is also backing up one or more other servers.3 Should one server fail, its service groups are
failed over to its backup, which now must support its own applications and those of the failed
server.
Parallel Database, in which multiple servers can be running the same application against a
commondatabase.This is ahighlyspecialized configuration thatrequires aspecial database
that can run in a distributed manner on multiple servers. Oracle’s Real Application Cluster
(RAC) database is such a database. It provides the facilities for distributed lock management
anddistributedcachemanagement.
DisasterRecovery
Clusters can be arranged to be disaster-tolerant by creating a second cluster at a remote site.
However, only one server can be updating the database at any one time. Therefore, an
application can onlybe running on one server at a time. Its backup and the servers at the remote
nodeareallidlesofarasthisapplication isconcerned.
What is Active/Active?
Wehavedescribed active/activearchitectures in manyof our previous articles.4 Webrieflyreview
thisarchitecturesothatwecancompareittoclusters.
An active/active system is a network of
node1
independent processing nodes cooperating in a
appl data
common application. Should a node fail, all that A base
needs to be done is to switch over that node’s
active
users to a surviving node. Recovery is in node3
subsecondstoseconds. replication data appl
network base A
DatabaseReplication active
Each processing node has access to a copy of node2
the common application database. These
appl data
database copies are kept synchronized via A base
bidirectional data replication. Whenever a
active
processing node makes a change to the
database, it replicates that change to all of the
other database copies in the application
network.
Data replication is generally asynchronous, though there are techniques for synchronous data
replication. A change queue of some sort, provided at each node, records all of the changes
3
Notethatthisisnotourdefinitionofactive/active,asdescribedlater.Toresolvethisconfusion,Microsoftispushingthe
termmulti-instanceforthisclusterconfiguration.
4
SeeWhatisActive/Active?IntheOctober,2006,issueoftheAvailabilityDigest.
4
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

made to the database at that node.5 This may be a transaction log (audit trail) maintained by a
transaction management facility, or it may be a log created by the application or by database
triggers. The replication engine fetches changes from the change log and sends them to the
targetsystem,wheretheyareappliedtothedatabase.
ReplicationLatency
Thereisadelayfrom thetimethatachangeisappliedtothesourcedatabaseandthetimethatit
is applied to the target database. This time delay is known as replication latency. Replication
latencybringswithittwoproblems,datacollisionsanddatalossfollowingafailover.
Data Collisions - Because there is a delay before the target system sees an update, it is
possiblethatchanges tothesamedataitem canbemadeattwo differentnodes ataboutthe
same time. Both of these changes will be replicated to the other node, where they will
overwrite the original change. Both databases are now different, and both are wrong. There
aretechniquesfordetectingandautomaticallyresolvingdatacollisions.
Data Loss Following a Failover – Should one node fail, changes that are currently in the
replication pipeline will be lost. Partial transactions will be rolled back at the surviving nodes,
andthesemustberesubmitted.
Split-Brain Mode
As withclusters,if communicationis lostbetweentwonodes,theycannotreplicatetoeachother.
There are then two choices – take one node down by moving its users to the other node, or let
bothnodescontinuetofunctioninsplit-brainmode.
In the latter case, each node will continue to update its copy of the database and will queue its
changes to be replicated to the other node when communications are restored. During this time,
thedatabaseswilldiverge;buttheirintegritywillotherwisebemaintained.
When communication is restored, each node will send its queued changes to the other node.
There are bound to be data collisions, which must be resolved in the same way that the system
normallyresolvesdatacollisions,
Note that whereas split-brain mode in a cluster results in data corruption, split-brain mode in an
active/activesystemresultsonlyindatabaseconvergence.
RollingUpgrades
Hardware, software, or applications can be upgraded at any node simply by moving its users to
another node, upgradingthe nowidle node,and then movingits users back totheir original node.
An upgrade can be rolled through the entire application network one node at a time by using this
process.
DisasterRecovery
Disaster recovery comes for free in an active/active system provided the nodes are
geographically separated. Should one node be taken out of service for any reason, all that is
required to restore full service to the users is to move those users who had been using the failed
nodetothesurvivingnode,anoperationthatcanbeperformedinseconds.
5
Highleyman,W.H.,Holenstein,P.J.,Holenstein,B.D.,Chapter3,AsynchronousReplication, BreakingtheAvailability
Barrier:SurvivableSystemsforEnterpriseComputing,AuthorHouse;2004.
5
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Comparing Clusters and Active/Active Systems
Both clusters and active/active systems provide high availability through redundancy. However,
therearesomestrikingdifferences.
Availability
Failover time for a cluster is typically measured in minutes as service groups are migrated, the
databaseisrecovered,anddatabases areopened.Failovertimeforactive/activesystemscanbe
measured in subseconds or seconds as all that is required is to switch failed users to a surviving
system.
Let us take the case of a cluster with a five-minute (300 second) failover time and compare it to
an active/active system with a three-second failover time. Over a long period, the cluster will be
down one hundred times as long as the active/active system, thus lopping off two 9s from its
availability relative to the active/active system. If the servers in an active/active system are
providing seven 9s availability (an average downtime of three seconds per year), those same
serversinaclusterarrangementwouldprovidefive9sofavailability(anaveragedowntimeoffive
minutesperyear).6
Furthermore, a cluster failure affects all users, whereas a failure of a node in an active/active
systemaffectsonlytheusersbeingservicedbythatsystem.
Thisleadstotheprimaryactive/activeruleforextremeavailabilities:Letitfail,butfixitfast.
ApplicationConstraints
Forbothclustersandactive/activesystems,thereareconstraintsontheapplicationsinorderto
allowthemtoruninthatmode.Howevertheconstraintsaredifferent.
ClusterApplicationConstraints–Anapplicationmust:
 beeasytostopandrestart.
 beeasytomonitor.
 beabletousesharedstorage.
 beabletostoreitsstateondisk.
 beabletorestartfromitssavedstate.
 notcorruptdataonacrash.
Active/ActiveConstraints–Anapplicationmust:7
 bearchitectedsothatthedatabaseislooselycoupledtopermitreplication.
 beabletohandledistributeddeadlocksifsynchronousreplicationisused.
 beabletogenerateuniquenumbersacrosstheapplicationnetwork.
 notstorelocalcontextinmemory.
 beabletocontrolbatchprocessinginadistributednetwork.
 beabletomanage,monitor,andconfiguredistributedapplications.
6
Seeourcompanionarticleinthisissue,CalculatingAvailability-ClusterAvailability.
7
See Appendix 4, A Consultant’s Critique, Breaking the Availability Barrier: Active/Active Systems in Practice,
AuthorHouse;2007.
6
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

OtherComparisons
Cluster Active/Active
SplitBrain DataCorruption DataDivergence
DataSharing None(unlessRACisused) Unlimited
ApplicationScaling No(unlessRACisused) Unlimited
DisasterRecovery Applicationactiveononenode Applicationactiveonallnodes
Heterogeneity None Limitedonlybyreplicationproduct
RollingUpgrades Yes,ifexecutablesareonprivatedisk Yes
DataCollisions No Yes(unlesssynchronous
replicationIsused)
DataIntegrity Datacorruption Dataloss(unlesssynchronous
followingfailover replicationisused)
Maturity Mature(VAXclusterintroducedin1984). Developing
Summary
Clustertechnologyisverymatureandissupportedbyaplethoraofproducts.
Active/activetechnologyisthenewguyontheblock.Itsproductsupportisgrowing,andthereare
a number of very successful implementations. Active/active technology can provide an order of
magnitudeormoreimprovementinavailability.
ClustersareHA(highavailability).
Active/ActiveisCA(continuousavailability).
7
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
