– Our January Twitter Feed of Outages
January 2018
A challenge every issue for the Availability Digest is to determine which of the many
availability topics out there win coveted status as Digest articles. We always regret
not focusing our attention on the topics we bypass. With our new Twitter presence,
we don’t have to feel guilty. This article highlights some of the tweets that made
headlines in recent days.
How Puerto Rico is Rebuilding Its Network Three Months After Maria
It took less than 24 hours for Hurricane Maria to take Puerto Rico off the grid. The first Category 4
storm to hit the island since 1932, Maria knocked out power, shut down ports and left the entire
territory completely in the dark. Once the storm passed, the government had to rely on physical
messengers to assess the damage and to relay information across the island. Three months after
Maria made landfall, rolled-back regulations, experimental technologies and portable satellite
terminals have helped the government and private-sector restore communications across more than
85 percent of the island.
https://t.co/Os5hnWgyA0
Backing Up Big Data? Chances Are You’re Doing It Wrong
The increasing pervasiveness of social networking, multi-cloud applications and Internet of Things
devices and services continues to drive exponential growth in big data solutions. As businesses
become more data driven, larger and more current data sets become important to support the online
business processes, analytics, intelligence and decisions. These big data solutions typically are built
upon a new class of hyperscale, distributed, multi-cloud, datacentric applications. While these
NoSQL, semi-structured, highly distributed data stores are perfect for handling vast amounts of big
data, they no longer can be effectively supported by legacy data management and protection
models. A different approach for backup and recovery is needed.
https://t.co/cfWtxsggJm
NASA and HPE Push the Envelope on HPC in Space
Technology is rapidly transforming the way we think and understand the universe. In the realm of
space science, technological advancements have enabled man to study Earth, explore new worlds,
and even walk on the moon. Today, high performance computing (HPC) is accelerating space
research and scientific discovery like never before. Organizations like NASA are using the most
cutting-edge HPC solutions to analyze troves of complex data, conduct experiments, advance the
Mission to Mars, and much more. NASA has teamed up with leading manufacturer Hewlett Packard
Enterprise (HPE) to bring the most powerful earth-based systems into orbit in a mission
called Spaceborne Computer.
1
© 2018 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

https://t.co/Igf4NVqhog
Australia becomes World’s First to Move Stock Exchange to A Blockchain
The Australian Securities Exchange (ASX) has confirmed that it is to become the world’s first global
market to use blockchain technology to clear and settle trades. The distributed ledger will replace the
outdated Clearing House Electronic Subregister System, also known as CHESS, that ASX currently
uses. Even though ASX states that it continues to be a robust and reliable system, they are taking
advantage of the opportunity to replace CHESS with a next-generation post-trade platform.
https://t.co/zLStE8S4FP
The 10 Biggest Cloud Outages Of 2017
CRN’s end-of-year list includes IBM, GitHub, Facebook, Microsoft Azure, and others.
https://t.co/r8qdjUuDMC
Everything you need to know about Serverless Computing
The potentially game-changing technology of serverless computing isn’t brand new; but like
technologies before it such as containers, there’s a few myths and misconceptions about it. To
overcome this lack of insight into what to use serverless computing for, when not to use it, and how
much it costs, CBR’s James Nunns teamed up with Ian Massingham, Worldwide Lead, AWS
Technical Evangelism at Amazon Web Services, to answer the big questions about the technology.
https://t.co/eV6KbhnTSp
IT infrastructure failing as if the past two decades never happened
In Greek mythology, King Sisyphus was an arrogant ruler who believed he was smarter than Zeus.
As punishment for his hubris, Sisyphus was tasked with pushing a boulder up a hill in the
underworld, only to have it spin out of his control and roll back down. Based on recent data centre
downtime events, we can only describe the process of keeping IT infrastructure running as
Sisyphean. Data centre owners and operators repeatedly watch as the boulder slips from their grasp
and back down the hill.
https://t.co/ckN93apBtM
Hardening Power Grids for Nuclear and EMP Attacks by North Korea
Last month, federal agencies and utility executives held GridEx IV, a biennial event where officials
responsible for hundreds of local utilities game out scenarios in which North America’s power grid
could fail. Potential calamities both physical and cyber are reviewed, with participant responses
analyzed to better prepare for any future attack. This year, the event took on an added urgency
given growing concern with a weapon straight out of the Cold War: an electromagnetic pulse, or
EMP, emanating from a nuclear blast—specifically, one delivered by a North Korean missile or
satellite detonated miles above the Earth. Though GridEx IV didn’t pose this exact scenario, industry
experts concede there’s no clear plan to deal with it.
https://t.co/bxFF5ZNvhk
2
© 2018 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Five Key Availability Predictions For 2018
Availability becomes increasingly important as businesses continue to increase their reliance on
digital technologies and heavy dependence on the Internet. Applications and even consumer-facing
services are now shifting to cloud and hybrid models as companies realize that in-house IT, once
tasked with running an Exchange server and maintaining desktops, lack the tools and specialist
expertise to keep these systems running.
https://t.co/MbzUpDVYME
Elon Musk's massive Australian battery just chalked up another record
Elon Musk’s battery in South Australia made international headlines in December for being the
biggest of its type in the world. Then, just weeks after being activated, the very same battery claimed
another world record for the time it took to spring into action following a power outage. The battery
bounded into action just 140 milliseconds after a power plant in the neighboring state of Victoria
suffered a failure that would ordinarily have led to a lengthy power cut. The battery fed its stored
energy into the national power grid, preventing an inconvenient blackout from affecting numerous
homes in nearby towns and cities.
https://t.co/7UBtDDNsDS
Why your old network infrastructure is holding you back (more than you know)
When communications infrastructure is not refreshed as often as end points, such as servers and
mobile devices, limitations can quickly manifest.
https://t.co/lFtzSgCied
Civil Works Accident Brings Down Two Manchester Data Centers
More often than not, the specific event that triggers a data center outage is unpredictable.
Companies spend tens of millions of dollars designing redundant infrastructure and automatic
failover systems to compensate for the unpredictable. But that goal is unreachable by definition.
A civil contractor accidentally drove a spike through a power main in Manchester, England, in early
December. It cut off power supply to two of the three buildings on the data center campus operated
by UKFast, the British service provider. The facilities’ backup power system failed to do what it was
designed to do, and the data centers went dark.
https://t.co/UutokVZYVw
Apple's iPhones slowed to tackle ageing batteries
Many customers have long suspected that Apple slows down older iPhones to encourage people to
upgrade. The company has now said it does slow down some models as they age but only because
the phones' battery performance diminishes over time. The practice was confirmed after a customer
shared performance tests on Reddit, suggesting his iPhone 6S had slowed down considerably as it
had aged but had suddenly sped up again after the battery had been replaced.
https://t.co/TvhnODNcO0
3
© 2018 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

How MIT Students Fooled a Google Algorithm
Machine learning algorithms, which use large amounts of data to power everything from your
email to language translation, are being heralded as the next big thing in technology. The only
problem is that they’re vulnerable.
https://t.co/TN5CaGkmMM
Hewlett Packard Enterprise: A Company In Chaos
Despite reporting in-line results in Q4, HPE stock fell on news of CEO Meg Whitman's departure.
1) HPE fundamentals are still a complete mess, with declining revenues in its core server products.
2) The software business, once considered the lynchpin of HPE post-split, has been sold to
MicroFocus for $8.8 billion, eliminating a major growth driver for the company. 3) High memory
prices, specifically for NAND flash, continued to eat into HPE's margins. 4) HPE lacks direction, and
even new leadership won't be able to shake it up in the near term. Continue to avoid this stock,
despite its new lows.
https://t.co/y7MfuqGhji
Creating Chaos to Save the Datacenter
Downtime has been plaguing companies for decades, and the problems have only been
exacerbated during the Internet era and with the rise of ecommerce and the cloud. Over the past
several years, top hyperscalers and larger enterprises have started to break things in their
infrastructures on purpose to smoke out weaknesses in the systems and to figure out how to harden
them before failures catch them unprepared. Top-tier cloud service providers have become
particularly vocal about the concept of chaos engineering, particularly given the multiple points of
failure that are inherent throughout their massive and highly-distributed environments.
https://t.co/mJIWUnU5xs
Atlanta airport had no plan for total power outage
While the airport had conducted drills for partial outages, making plans to shuffle operations between
terminals, it made zero preparations for the entire facility to go dark. Among the airport’s challenges:
It had no electricity to power its public announcement system and only hundreds of employees to
manage 35,000 stranded people. The airport’s backup generators can power only one elevator per
concourse. The generators in concourses D and E failed shortly after switching on.
https://t.co/v8ABObUlHD
Atlanta airport's main and backup power lines flow through same tunnel damaged by fire
The fire that knocked out Atlanta airport’s power for 11 hours Sunday, 17 December, erupted in a
tunnel that housed both the main power lines and a backup supply, according to officials
investigating the incident. The fire was traced to a failed switchgear, which is equipment that
regulates the flow of power, in a tunnel that carries seven power lines from two sources to the
airport. “This fire was located adjacent to the redundant circuit cables and switching mechanisms
serving the airport; and those cables were damaged, resulting in the outage and loss of redundant
service methods,” Georgia Power explained in a statement.
https://t.co/olmo1FSTlu
4
© 2018 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

How could one fire bring the world's busiest airport to a standstill? Even redundant
systems can fail, engineers say
How could one fire knock out the main power to Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International — the
world’s busiest airport — and at the same time disable the backup power, snarling air travel in the
United States during one of the busiest travel times of the year? This is an airport, after all, that is
supposedly among the most secure and locked-down facilities in a world where the threat of
terrorism is an everyday reality. The short answer, according to engineering experts, is nothing is
100% certain when it comes to secure sources of electricity.
https://t.co/myNS1fomne
Resiliency in the age of cloud services
Introducing cloud service redundancy starts with managing application workload: how do you direct
work across multiple cloud service providers?
https://t.co/51d00DlmcG
Despite Security Vulnerability, Businesses Still Prefer Office 2007
A new research study has found that over two thirds of companies are still opting to run Office 2007,
which is software that Microsoft no longer supports. Spiceworks, an IT network that focuses on
industry professionals, has found within its latest research that the majority of businesses are
running Office XP, Office 2003, and Office 2007, while Microsoft pushes Office 365--a batch of
subscriptions allowing access to several software including newer versions of Microsoft Office, etc.
https://t.co/2W0RapWDWJ
Is Your Website Ready for The Holiday Season?
With the holidays just around the corner, have you prepared your website for a boost in traffic? This
year, holiday online shopping is expected to surpass e-commerce sales in 2016 by 18-21%.
