The U.S. Government’s IT Fossils
February2016
Americans won’t soon forget the botched launch of Healthcare.gov. The website,
intended to support signups for the new Affordable Care Act, came online in October
2013; but it quickly failed as it proved to be incapable of handling the subscription load imposed upon it.
Eventually, the website became operational with the help of some bright engineers from Google, Oracle,
and other Silicon Valley companies. Originally budgeted for USD $95 million, the ultimate cost of the
website,accordingtotheOfficeofInspectorGeneral,reachedUSD$1.7billion.
Healthcare.govis amodernsystem thatnow is performingflawlessly.This is notthecasewiththebulk of
governmentITsystems.Mostaredecadesoldandareexperiencinganalarmingrateofoutages.
The Sad State of the U.S. Government’s Legacy Systems
The U.S. government operates 28 systems that are at least 25 years old and eleven systems that are
morethan35yearsold.ItspendsUSD$60billion,75%ofitsITbudget,eachyeartokeepthesesystems
running. Just finding the skill sets to maintain the systems is becoming increasingly difficult. Less than
25%ofcollegecomputer-scienceprogramsteachold-schoolskillssuchasCOBOL.
Aging federal IT systems are seen as a securityrisk. Manyof the older systems are impossible to secure
againstcyberattacks.WhentheOfficeofPersonnelManagement(OPM)washackedinmid-2014,1ittook
a year to discover the attack. By that time, information on 22 million federal employees and contractors
had been stolen. None of the social security numbers stored in the 1980s-era database were encrypted.
Thestoragearrays weretoooldtosupportencryption.
U.S. Federal Chief Information Officer Tony Scott has stated that the problem of outdated federal IT
systemsisacrisisthatisbiggerthanY2K.IntestimonybeforetheU.S.Congress,heassertedthat“much
ofthegovernmentrunsonveryold,outdatedtechnology.”
In a survey by Symantic, 70% of federal agencies experienced downtime of thirty minutes or more in the
monthstudied.Thebreakdownofoutagerootcausesincludedthefollowing:
 45%wereblamedonnetworkoutagesorserverproblems.
 20%werecausedbyInternetconnectivityloss.
 13%weretheresultofnaturaldisasters.
 7%wereduetoapplicationerrors.
 6%werecausedbyhumanerror.
1TheGovernmentOPMHackGetsWorse,AvailabilityDigest;July2015.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/1007/OPM_attack_2.pdf
1
©2016SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

When outages occur, 48% of workers said that they do what they can by telephone. 33% use personal
devices.24%trytofindaworkaround,suchasGoogleApps.
When asked to grade their IT departments, workers gave an “A” in 15% of the cases. A “B” was awarded
in49%ofthecases,anda“C”gradewasgivenin27%ofthecases.
In 2014, the U.S. Congress passed a sweeping IT acquisition reform bill, the “Federal Information
Technology and Acquisition Reform Act.” The bill seeks to dig into the reliance by federal agencies on
agingsoftwareandarchaichardware.
Oneagencyin particular has becomeafocus of theact,and that is NASA, the U.S. National Aeronautics
and Space Administration. NASA operates 67 systems whose value totals USD $1.4 billion. Lawmakers
have rated NASA with a grade of “F,” just one of three agencies to earn a failing grade. Seeking answers
abouttheageandoverallhealthofNASA’smission-criticalsystems,lawmakersasked:
 What are NASA’s top three mission-critical legacy IT systems in need of modernization or
replacementandtheplanneddatetoswitchoverfromtheoldtechnology?
 WhatarethetopfiveoldestIThardwaresystemsandsoftwareapplicationsusedbyNASA?
 Dothefiveoldestsystemsandapplicationssupportanymission-criticalprograms?
 Whataretheoldestprogramminglanguages,suchasCOBOLorFortran,usedbyNASA?
 Howmanystaffmembersareavailabletomaintaincodeinthesearchaiclanguages?
Undergoing similar scrutiny under the Act will be several other agencies that have a history of chronic
outages.Someexamplesfollow.
The Six-Week Outage of the U.S. Immigration Court System
The U.S. Executive Office for Immigration Review (EOIR) supports 59 immigration courts. These courts
decide which foreign-born individuals that have violated immigration laws must be deported and which
onescanstayintheU.S.
On April 12, 2014, five servers located in the EOIR headquarters in Falls Church, Virginia, U.S.A. failed.
Information provided by EOIR indicated that the five servers needed parts that would not be available
untilsometimethefollowingmonth.How couldfiveservers be simultaneouslydamagedtotheextent that
partshadtobereplaced?Soundslikeapowerfailuregoneseriouslywrongtous.
In any event, the servers were repaired and returned to service at the end of May 2014. The EOIR
immigrationcourtswerewithoutITservicesforsixweeks.
The immigration court judges do not have court reporters. Rather, all court proceedings are recorded
digitally. They are transcribed later only if needed. During the six-week outage, court proceedings were
recordedoncassetterecorders.
The 260 immigration court judges turned to pencil-and-paper methods for taking notes. This outage
slowed an already clogged immigration court system with a backlog of 360,000 cases. EOIR had to
prioritizecasestocompensateforitsrelianceonmanualprocesses.
When the EOIR system was restored to service, all of the information captured manually over the
previous six weeks had to be entered into the computer system. This process took months before the
courtswereabletofullyreturntotheuseofonlinecourtproceedings.
2
©2016SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

The Multi-Day Outage of the State Department’s Visa and Passport System
The U.S. State Department operates the Consular Consolidated Database (CCD). The CCD supports
worldwide visa and passport verification operations and allows visas to be printed and passports to be
issued.
The CCD contains more than 100 million visa cases and 75 million photographs. It has links to other
federal agency security databases, such as those of the FBI (the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation),
theU.S.DepartmentofHomelandSecurity,andtheU.S.StateDepartment.About35,000newvisacases
are added to the CCD every day (about twelve million per year). The CCD is one of the largest Oracle-
baseddatabasesintheworld.
On July 19, 2014, the CCD system crashed shortly after maintenance was performed on it. The State
Department indicated that the root cause of the outage was a combination of software optimization and
hardwarecompatibilityissues.Evidently,thedatabase hadnotbeentakenoffline duringthemaintenance
operationandwassubsequentlycorruptedasaresultofthesuddenoutage.
It took over a week to repair the database and to bring the system back online. The outage stranded
thousands of people worldwide who no longer could complete their visa or passport applications to get
into the United States. In most cases, there was little doubt of the traveler’s right to enter the United
States. However, there was no manual workaround procedure available. Consular officers explained to
frustrated travelers that they could not handwrite visas because security measures prevent consular
officers from printing visas unless they are approved through the CCD database system. Similarly,
passportscouldnotbeissuedwithoutCCDapproval.
Once the system was returned to service, there was a massive backlog of visa and passport applications
toclearup,aprocessthattookseveralweeksanddelayedtravelersevenfurther.
The One-Week Outage of the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office System
When Anthrax was mailed to several Capitol Hill offices in the fall of 2001, the United States Patent and
Trademark Office (USPTO) set out to become a paperless agency. It now has achieved that goal. Patent
applications arefiled viatheir new Electronic FilingSystem (EFS).TheEFSalso provides communication
servicesbetweenthepatentexaminersandthepatentpractitioners.
On December 22, 2015, the USPTO experienced a catastrophic major power outage at its headquarters
inAlexandria,Virginia,U.S.A.Inastatementthatitissued,theUSPTOexplained:
“PowerthatcomesintotheUSPTO’smainbuildingfeedstwopowerfiltrationsystemsthatprovide
steady,“filtered”powersosystemsdon’tsufferfromdamagingsurgesordropsinpowersupply.A
malfunctioninthepowersupplylinesfeedingthesetwosystemscausedsignificantdamagetoboth
systems.ThisiswhatwebelievecausedoursystemstogodownonTuesdaynight.
“Because of their size, these large and highly complex power filtration systems cannot be easily
replaced. We are working with service providers to obtain a source of uninterrupted conditioned
powertothedatacenterassoonaspossible.”
It took the USPTO a week to replace the damaged power filtration systems so that it could get its EFS
system back online and work through the backlog of patent applications that had formed during the
outage.
3
©2016SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Summary
The U.S. government faces the same problems as such other industries as financial-services and health-
care.2 It is saddled with legacy IT systems that are decades old. These systems are fragile and often
unmaintainable. Theavailabilityof thesoftware skills requiredtocorrector modifylegacyapplications are
disappearingrapidly.
The government spends the majority of its IT budget on maintaining its old applications. However,
replacing the applications would be even more costly. Fortunately for the U.S. government, the “Federal
Information Technology And Acquisition Reform Act” recently passed by the U.S Congress may be the
salvationof thesesystemsif itmotivates Congress toprovidethefunds necessarytoupgradeatleastthe
mission-criticalsystemsuponwhichthenationdepends.3
Acknowledgements
Materialforthisarticlewastakenfromthefollowingsources:
IToutagesareanongoingproblemfortheU.S.government,Computerworld;August19,2014.
TheCrisisinFederalITThat’sScarierThanY2K,Nextgov;November20,2015.
LawmakersTakeOnFederalITFossils,Nextgov;December29,2015.
U.S.ImmigrationCourtSystemOutageEntersWeekSix, IEEESpectrum;May19,2014.
State’spassportandvisasystemcrashes,FCW;July24,2014.
US State Department database used to process passports and visas still hasn’t recovered from a crash
lastweek–leavingtensofthousandsofpeoplestrandedoverseas,InformationWeek;July30,2014.
USPTO experiences catastrophic failure of electronic patent and trademark systems, IP Watchdog;
December28,2015.
2RBS–APosterChildforOutages,AvailabilityDigest;January2016.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/1101/rbs.pdf
3 As a side note, President Obama has included such funds in his proposed budget for the next fiscal year, but the Republican-
dominatedCongresshasdeclaredthatitwillignorehisbudget.
4
©2016SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com