Archive Storage – Disk or Tape?
November2010
In our companion article this month, Does Data Replication Eliminate the Need for Backup, we
talked about the perils of depending upon data replication as a backup method. Data replication
protects the system, but it does not protect the database. In the event of the loss of both the
production and standby databases either due to data corruption or due to a simultaneous loss of
bothdatabases,onlyadatabasebackupcanprovidethefacilityfordatabaserestorationbygoing
backtoaknowngoodpointintime.
Backups can be made either to magnetic tape or to disk (typically as magnetic-tape backup
images). Disk is faster. Tape is cheaper. Which should be used? An interesting study by The
ClipperGrouphasshedsomelightonthisquestion.Wereviewitsconclusionsbelow.
Backing Up
There are strong reasons for backing up to disk – so called virtual tape or D2D backup – rather
than to magnetic tape (D2T). Disk backups are less operator-intensive and are faster.
Consequently, backups can be taken more frequently, leading to less data loss should the
database have to be recovered. Furthermore, recovery is faster and more reliable from disk than
itis from tape.Theuseofvirtualtapebackups canreducedataloss andrecoverytimes tohours
ascomparedtodays,asisoftenthecasewithmagnetictape.
Archiving
But the recovery of data in the event of system failure,
accidental deletion, or malfeasance is only one purpose
for backing up the database. Another important purpose
is archiving. Long-term retention of data is often
required for regulatory compliance, for litigation, or by
company policy. Archived data may need to be
accessed for other purposes, such as tracking down
securityviolations.
At some point, the retention of database backups for
FromClipperNotes,publishedbyTheClipperGroup
recovery purposes loses its value. For instance, a
companymaydecide that the liklihood of having to go back more than three months to retrieve a
backup quickly so that the system can be restored or so that erroneously deleted data can be
retrievedisminimal.Itthenfacesachoiceonhowtoarchiveolderdata–continuetomaintainthe
backupsondiskorarchivethebackupstomagnetictape–theD2D2Tstrategy.
1
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Certainly, by archiving old backups to tape, more time will be required to access or restore any
data that has been archived to tape. On the other hand, it seems that tape archiving should be
significantlylessexpensivethandiskarchiving.Butwhatarethosesavings?
Disk Versus Tape
David Reine and Mike Kahn of The Clipper Group (www.clipper.com) published an in-depth
analysis of a typical business operation facing this problem in their report entitled Disk and Tape
Square Off Again – Tape Remains King of the Hill with LTO-4.1 They compared the monetary
costs and the energy costs of archiving to disk (D2D) or to LTO-4 tape from a disk-based store
that holds backups for ninety days (D2D2T). They concluded that long-term disk archiving cost
twenty-three times as much as tape archiving and consumed 290 times the energy as that
consumed by tape over a five-year period. If data deduplication is used for disk backup, the cost
differenceisreducedtoafactoroffive.
TheStrawmanCompany
The studyassumed that a company held its backups on disk for one calendar quarter. The study
then compared an all-disk archive solution (D2D) with a tape-library archive solution (D2D2T) for
storing backups after the initial ninety-day period. The cost to store the backup tape images on
diskfortheintialninety-dayperiodwasnotconsideredasitwasthesameforbothsolutions.
Ninety-DayOnlineBackup
At the beginning of the five-year cycle, the database size was 50 terabytes. The company
performed a full backup of the entire database once a week with daily incremental backups. 5%
of the database changed each day, and those changes were captured in the incremental
backups.
The full and incremental backups were kept on disk for thirteen weeks (one quarter). After that,
the thirteenth week was archived to disk or tape as a quarterly backup. The incremental and full
backupsweredeletedaftertheywereninety-daysold.
The company’s database grew at a rate of 50% per year. The disk storage required for storing
ninety days of incremental and weekly backups was 845 terabytes the first year and grew to
4,278terabytesbythefifthyear.Thecostofthisstoragewas notincludedinthecomparisonas it
wasthesameforbothdiskarchivingandtapearchiving.
ArchivingVolume
Backups were archived every quarter. At the end of the first year, the archive had 200 terabytes
of data stored in it (four quarters at 50 terabytes per quarter). Each year, the quarterly backups
for that year were added to thearchive.Withthedatabasegrowingat arateof 50% per year,the
archivegrewto2,384terabytesofdatabytheendofthefifthyear.
GeneralAssumptions
Assumptionsapplicabletobothdiskandtapeapproachesinclude:
 Power cost was assumed to be $0.12 per KWH. This was higher than the national
averageof$0.10perKWHbutlowerthanthe$0.18perKWHfoundinsomeareas.
1
DavidReine,MikeKahn,DiskandTapeSquareOffAgain–TapeRemainsKingoftheHillwithLTO-4, ClipperNotes;
February13,2008.
http://www.dell.com/downloads/global/corporate/iar/Clipper_Tape_v_Disk_2008.pdf.
2
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

 The cost of energy for cooling was assumed to be equal to the cost of energy to run the
diskortapeequipment.
 Powercostwasassumedtobeconstantoverthefive-yearperiod.
 Spacecostwas$300persquarefootper year.
 200 terabytes of storage were required the first year for archiving and grew to 2,384
terabytesthefifthyear.
TheDisk-ArraySolution
The study‘s authors assumed the use of a SATA-2 platform from a Tier-2 storage array supplier.
The fibre-connected storage area networks (SANs) used 750 gigabye disks in a RAID 5
configurationandwerescalableto 245tereabytesinasingleconfiguration.
After the third year, the data center replaced its three-year old SANs with new technology that
doubled the SAN storage capacity and that cut the SAN footprint in half. The result was a
requirement for one array the first year, growing to five arrays the fifth year, in order to hold the
quarterlyarchives.
ThefollowingSANparameterswereassumed:
 Diskcapacityutilizationratewas85%.
 ASANcost$2.6milliondollars.
 ASANcouldstoreupto245gigabytesofdata.
 Afterthethirdyear,newSANscouldstoreupto490gigabytesofdata.
 SANs would bereplaced withthenewhigher-capacitySANs whentheywere three-years
old.
 SANacquisitioncost,includingmaintenance,wasabout$14millionoverfiveyears.
 AfullyconfiguredSANrequired39squarefeetoffloorspace,includingaisles.
 AfullyconfiguredSANrequired11KW ofpower,orabout96,000KWHperyear.
TheTape-ArraySolution
If tape archiving was used, the ninety days of online backups were still held on the disk
subsystem.Thetapearchiveheldthequarterlybackups.
AnLTO-4taperoboticlibrarywasassumed.Ithadanultimatestoragecapacityof10petabyesso
thattapecartidgesdidnothavetoberemoved(atleast,overthefive-yearstudyperiod).
The number of tape drives was chosen to ensure that the quarterly backup could be
accomplished within a seven-day window. Two tape drives were configured with this in mind. In
the early years, only one tape drive was needed, giving a spare tape drive. In later years, both
tapedriveswereinuse.
Additionaltapeparametersthatwereassumedincluded:
 AnLTOcompressionratioof2:1wasachieved.
 Acartridgeheld800gigabytesofdata(today’sLTOcartridgescanhold1.5terabytes).
 Atapedrivecouldachieveaneffectivetransferrateof734gigabytesperhour.
 Thetape-systemacquisitioncostwas$242,000.
 Tape-systemmaintenancecostwas$33,000overthefive-yearperiod.
 Tapecartridgescost$12,600perhundred.
 Thetapesystemrequired100squarefeetoffloorspace.
 Thetapesystemduringthefirstyeardrew185watts,orabout1,600KWHperyear.
3
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

 The fully configured tape system for the fifth year required about 527 watts, or about
4,600KWHperyear.
Disk/TapeComparison
The resulting five-year total cost of ownership (TCO) for disk archiving and for tape archiving is
shown in the following table. These costs applied only to archiving. Backup for ninety days was
providedbydiskinbothcases.
Five-YearTCO
Disk Tape
AcquisitionCost $13,000,000 $241,600
MaintenanceCost 1,140,000 33,312
MediaCost 207,703
EnergyCost 380,000 1,307
SpaceCost 180,000 153,000
TotalCost $14,700,000 $636,922
Theresultwasthatdiskarchivingcost23timesasmuchastapearchivingandused290timesas
much energy. In contrast, the disk-backup subsystem required for both disk and tape archiving
costover$37,000,000,ofwhichtheenergycostwas$840,000.
DiskDeduplication
The authors did not include the capability of disk-to-disk deduplication, in which each quarterly
archive includes only the changes from the previous quarter’s archive. They did, however, state
thatifacompressionratioof20:1couldbeachieved,disk archivingwouldcostabout$3,000,000,
including the cost of the data-deduplication software, virtual-tape engines, and virtual-tape
software.Thisreducedthedisk/tapecostratioforarchivingfrom23:1to5:1.
Summary
There are two needs for backing up a database – fast recovery in the event of a partial or full
database loss and long-term archiving. Fast recovery can only be achieved with disk-based
backup. Disk backup can reduce restoration time for a full database from days to hours and also
canreducefromdaystohourstheamountofdatalost.
However, the cost of fast recoveryafforded bydisk maynot be justified for long-term storage, for
which fast recovery is usually not required. The costs of long-term archiving of data can be
significantly reduced by using a disk-to-disk-to-tape strategy for backup and archiving. Recent
backups of data are stored on disk for fast recovery, but older data is archived to tape for
economy.
The Clipper Group study indicated significant savings when using tape instead of disk for
archiving. Assuming the last database backup is archived each quarter, tape can be 23 times
more economical than disk if quarterly backups are saved in full. Tape archiving can still be five
times more economical if data deduplication is used for the disk archive. In addition, tape
archivingisgreen.Itusessignificantlylessenergythandiskarchiving.
The use of only disk or the use of only tape may not address all of an organization’s goals. Disk
andtapeinatieredD2D2T solutionprovidecomplementaryvalues toachieveacompany’s goals
ofrecovery,dataprotection,compliance,energy,andTCOobjectives.
4
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com