IPv6 Is Here – Like It or Not
April2011
TheIPv4Doomsdayishere.Areyouprepared?
Inour articlealmosttwo years ago,1werepeatedthealarm raisedbymanythatthedecrepitIPv4
address space of 32 bits was about to be depleted. IPv6, with its 128-bit address space, was set
to become king. At the time of our article, the assignment of the last available IPv4 address was
expectedtobeinmid-2011.Wearenowapproachingmid-2011,andtheIPv4addresseshave,in
fact,beendepleted.WilltheInternetcollapse?
Of course not, but the transition to the new protocol specification is not trivial. If you elect not to
convert, you will survive for a while; but your Internet experience will become more and more
painful.
Helpishere.InarecentarticlepublishedintheCommunicationsoftheACM2(theAssociationfor
Computing Machinery), Vinton Cerf, who is recognized as one of the fathers of the Internet along
with Robert Kahn, collaborates with fellow Google associate Thomas Limoncelli to relate the
experiences of Google, Comcast, and Nokia as they successfully navigated the conversion from
IPv4 to IPv6. The result is one simple message. As the old KISS saying goes, “Keep it simple,
stupid.”
In this article, we review the IPv4/IPv6 conundrum and the successful approaches suggested by
CerfandLimoncelli.
The History of IPv4
The roots of IPv4 go back to 1973 when Vinton Cerf and Robert Kahn started to explore packet-
switching networks for the United States’ Department of Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency (DARPA). The result was a dual-protocol solution that comprised the Internet Protocol
(IP) that carried datagrams end-to-end through packet networks and the Transmission Control
Protocol(TCP),whichmanagedandsequencedpacketstodelivercompletemessagestohosts.
ThefirstcommercialversionoftheInternetwasintroducedin1981withversion4ofIP.Itbecame
known as IPv4. The address space for IPv4 was set at 32 bits, which provided for a nearly
inexhaustible (or so the developers thought) four billion addresses, about one for every other
man, woman, and child on earth. Except for Internet Service Providers (ISPs) and large
corporations, these addresses are normally split up into a 24-bit network address and an 8-bit
fieldforhostaddressesonthenetwork.
1TheIPv4Doomsday,AvailabilityDigest;August2009.
2SuccessfulStrategiesforIPv6Rollouts.Really,CommunicationsoftheACM;April2011.
http://cacm.acm.org/magazines/2011/4/106582-successful-strategies-for-ipv6-rollouts-really/fulltext
1
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

However, the Internet grew with a fury that was never anticipated. As of the date of
Cerf’s and Limoncelli’s article in April, 2011, the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and
Numbers (ICANN), which assigns IP address space to end users, announced that it had just
allocatedthelastfiveofthe24-bitnetwork addresssubsets.toitsfiveworldwideRegionalInternet
Registries(RIRs),whichinturnwilldistributethemtotheircustomers.
In our previous article, we showed the results of an application for
iPhones and other devices available from Hurricane Electric, an IPv6
network provider. The application showed the estimated number of
days left before IPv4 addresses would be exhausted. On July 22,
2009, it was estimated that this would occur in 699 days. On April 4,
2011, about 21 months or 630 days later, that time has virtually
arrived. All of the 24-bit network addresses have been allocated to
the regional registries, and the Registries have only about 1.4 million
orsoaddressesleftforcustomerassignment.
Enter IPv6
The Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) recognized in the early
1990s that the rapid growth of the Internet would exhaust the supply
of IP addresses. In response, it specified a new IP address format
that quadrupled theaddress length to 128 bits. Being version6 of the
IP specification, IPv6 provides an immense address space – enough
togiveeveryknownstarintheuniverseaquadrillionIPaddresses.
Unfortunately,theIPv6formatisnotbackwards compatible withIPv4.
Systems that must communicate with both must use dual protocol
stacks. ISPs in particular are going to have to support dual-mode
operationforsomeyearstocome.
Moving from IPv4 to IPv6
Transitioning from IPv4 to IPv6 is not trivial. Not only are the protocol
stacks different, but the packet headers are also different. IPv6 requires the Internet Protocol
Security (IPSec) protocol, which is optional with IPv4. IPv6 does not support fragmentation – the
hostmustquerytheroutetodeterminethemaximum transmissionunit(MTU) andmustfragment
its messages accordingly. Four-gigabyte jumbo packets for video transmission are supported by
IPv6ifthelinkallows.
Fortunately,IPv4addressescanbeencapsulatedinIPv6addressesasthelow-order32bits,with
thehigher-orderbitssettoaspecifiedvalue.
Thomas Limoncelli suggests several approaches to the protocol conversion, some feasible and
somefraughtwithproblems.
DoNothing(Problems)
One option is to do nothing. Rely on your ISP to do the conversion for you. After all, they will be
runningdualIPstackstosupporttheircustomers,won’tthey?
Thoughthisapproachmayworkfortheshortterm,thereareseveralproblems.
 The translation between the protocols is expected to be slow. This will slow down the
responsivenessofyourwebsite,perhapsseriouslyimpactingyourusers’experience.
2
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

 If your websiteisgeotargeted–thatis,itsfunctionsdependuponknowingthelocationof
the devices logged onto your web site (for instance, marketing sites) – the location of
IPv4-enableddeviceswillnowbethatofyourISP.Geographicallocationwillbelost.
 At some time in the future, your ISP will probably drop IPv4 support. At that point, you
hadbetterbeconverted.
DoEverything(Problems)
Another option is to propose to your management that you make a complete conversion to IPv6.
This will require converting the network equipment – routers, switches, hubs, etc., the Domain
Name System (DNS), the Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) system, applications,
clients, desktops, and servers. It is a huge project that will involve every piece of equipment and
softwareinthenetwork.
ManagementmayseelittlevalueinthisBigBangapproach.Itisaprojectwithahighlikelihoodof
failure and one which will probably aggravate your network users during a very long transition.
Goodluckongettingitapproved.
DoOneThing(Feasible)
Pickasingleapplication–your“onething”–andfocusonmovingittoIPv6.
At the 2008 Google IPv6 Symposium, Comcast described a successful project that did just this –
its set-top box management software. Every set-top box needs an IP address so that the central
management facility can reach it for provisioning, testing, monitoring, billing, and other functions.
The number of set-top boxes that Comcast needed to deploy was more than the number of IPv4
addresses that it could reasonably get. It therefore went to IPv6. All new Comcast set-top boxes
nowcommunicateoverIPv6.
At the same conference, Nokia presented a case study in which it went to IPv6 for its new cell
phones for, of all reasons, power consumption. It turns out that IPv4 requires pings to keep the
Network Address Translation (NAT) session alive; IPv6 does not. Nokia’s phones can now turn
offtheirantennaeuntiltheyhavedatatosend.Thissavespowerandextendsthecellphone’slife
untilitsnextrecharge.
WorkFromtheOutsideIn(Feasible)
Web farms are usually hidden from the public Internet by some hardware device such as a load
balancer or a firewall.WhenexternalWebbrowsers connect to your website, it is through oneor
more of these devices. They act as a “man in the middle” to the server farm and perform many
functions. A new function that is available in many of these devices is IPv4/IPv6 protocol
conversion.
The strategy is then simple. Upgrade every component (if any) to IPv6 in the path from your ISP
to, for instance, your load balancer. Then use a load balancer that provides IP protocol
conversiontoconvertincomingIPv6traffictoIPv4,andoutgoingIPv4traffictoIPv6.
Thisisamanageableprojectthatcorrectstheproblemsofthe“donothing”approach.Conversion
isfastandhaslittleifanyeffectontheuserexperience.Geotargetingispreserved.
Thestrategygives youtimetoproceedwithafullconversionatameasuredpace.Aseachserver
becomes IPv6-ready with its IPv4/IPv6 dual stack, the load balancer no longer has to make the
conversions for that server. When all servers have been converted, conversion is no longer
3
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

needed in the load balancer. The same holds true for routers, DNS servers, and other
components, which can be upgraded in a controlled manner. The Web farm itself now handles
bothIPv4andIPv6traffic,andafullconversionhasbeenmade.NoBigBang–justapiece-meal
approachoveracomfortableperiodoftime.
Summary
The transition from IPv4 to IPv6 is difficult; but by taking it in little steps, it is doable without a
great deal of pain. In many cases, the difficulties imposed by not converting may be a great deal
greaterthanthedifficultiesimposedbytakingthetransitionsteps.
It is no longer safe to ignore IPv6 as a future requirement. The IPv4 space is now depleted.
Repeatingthesummaryfromourpreviousarticle:
“But there is no problem with doomsdays of the future. As long as it won’t happen on our
watch – as long as we will have been retired for a while when it comes – don’t take it out of
ourbudget.Leaveitforthenextguytofigureout.That’showwehandledtheY2Kdoomsday,
andthat’showwe’rehandlingtheIPv4doomsday.Afterall,that’stheIT way.”
Theabovestrategyisnolongervalid.
Acknowledgement
Thankstooursubscriber,PaulHolenstein,forpointingustothisarticle.
4
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com