Ensuring Resiliency Within the Cloud
December 2017
Reliable and resilient application architectures are fundamental to today’s data centers.
Reliable means that the failure of a system component is rare. Resilient means that if a
component does fail, it either can be restored to service or that its services can be
transferred quickly to another operational component. In today’s data centers, reliability and resiliency are
achieved by incorporating redundant servers whose databases are kept synchronized via data replication.
In this way, the backup server is immediately ready to take over processing should the production server
fail.
The emergence of cloud computing has dramatically changed the way we think about application
resiliency. When an application is running in the cloud, thin provisioning and auto-scaling maximize the
efficiency of the resources made available to the application. Should an application’s workload increase
suddenly, the cloud can immediately assign additional resources. If the application’s workload decreases,
the cloud can recover unneeded resources from the application.
Furthermore, spinning up secondary and tertiary disaster-recovery environments is easy; as the cloud
simply assigns the resources necessary to these environments. This provides a level of resiliency not
found in typical data center environments.
Reliability and Resiliency
A reliable service is a service that works as it was designed to work, responding in a predictable fashion
when it is needed. To be reliable, a service should be replicated, with the replicate databases kept
synchronized via data replication.
Another way to improve reliability is to build a service that is resilient. If the service fails, it can be restored
quickly. The service has the ability to withstand failure and to remain functional.
Resilient computing is a form of failover that distributes redundant implementation of IT resources across
physical locations. It is configured so that if one resource becomes deficient, processing is automatically
handed over to another redundant resource.
Resiliency is not architected only at the hardware level. It is the combination of intelligent infrastructure
design, coupled with intelligent software design, which results in highly-reliable cloud services.
In cloud computing, resiliency can refer to redundant IT resources within the same cloud (but in different
physical locations) or across multiple clouds.
Many enterprises assume the cloud is reliable and immune to failure. They need to understand the risk
associated with the failure of their cloud services. The cloud is a utility, and utilities fail. It is critical that
cloud customers be prepared for cloud downtime.
1
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Applications need to be designed to accommodate failure. This supports the concept of stateless design
for applications. The application can pick up at any point and not have to worry about reconstructing
state.
Furthermore, the application manager needs to have transparency into the cloud provider’s infrastructure
so that he can properly manage his applications.
Using a cloud provider with a global presence, one that can distribute an environment broadly, can help
build application resilience.
Cloud Services
Increasingly, today’s applications reside in architectures in which cloud services are critical path
components. If the cloud experiences problems, an application can fail.
What happens if a key cloud service fails? It is important that today’s cloud-service enabled applications
be provided redundancy at the cloud-services layer and that recovery of a cloud-service failure be
executed quickly – preferably in seconds, not minutes or hours – in order to provide resiliency of the cloud
service.
2
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

This can be accomplished by managing application workload across multiple cloud-service providers. If
this is done, a cloud failure may be mitigated quickly by shifting failed workload to another cloud-service
provider.
The Hybrid Cloud
Many IT departments are turning to hybrid cloud – a blend of traditional and cloud services – for greater
agility and flexibility to meet changing business requirements.
With hybrid cloud architectures as a foundation, enterprise workloads can originate from a wide range of
sources such as traditional data centers, private clouds, public clouds, and hybrid clouds. Furthermore,
the workload can be processed in any of these environments. Therefore, organizations can run their
workloads wherever they can achieve optimal efficiency.
If an organization supports multiple capabilities for enterprise applications, resiliency can be significantly
increased because there may be many systems on which a failed application may be restarted in the
event of a system failure.
IT Challenges
The growth of cloud services is creating new challenges for the IT staff when it comes to achieving high
resiliency:
• Environments can be difficult to integrate. In order to move an application quickly to a new
environment to achieve resiliency, the environments must be integrated.
• Many IT organizations are spending far more time and resources maintaining the cloud
infrastructure. This activity is made more complex if the infrastructure must be designed to
support resiliency.
• As a result, these organizations are spending less time innovating modern services for the
business and more time on resilient infrastructure.
A growing dependence on capabilities supplied by third parties makes it difficult for IT staff to have direct
control over all aspects of their cloud services. In order to provide resiliency, the IT staff needs direct
control of its infrastructure.
Enterprises must design their resiliency strategies to safeguard all of the resources required to execute
their business processes:
• Data is becoming a valuable business asset. Lost or corrupted data must be recovered
immediately.
• IT services are being delivered from a wide range of platforms, including traditional data centers,
private and public clouds, and hybrid clouds. If any one of these fails, applications requiring high
resiliency must be moved to a surviving platform.
• Data must be replicated between all of these sources so that it is available should a source fail.
Doing this makes the data resilient.
• As cloud computing becomes more IT resource intensive, organizations must now think in terms
of overall business resiliency - business processes, workflows, technology, and policies that
support the continuous availability of products and services.
3
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Organizations must try to avoid, rather than recover, from disruptions. However, disruptions are
inevitable. Fast recovery from a disruption is the key to resiliency.
DNS
DNS (Domain Name Service) is one of the most powerful tools for managing cloud workload. The DNS
service assigns URLs to IP addresses so that a request made to a given URL is routed to the appropriate
server. In the context of this article, the servers are located in a cloud.
With DNS, one can adjust the application workloads across cloud services by remapping a URL to other
servers. Workloads can be shifted from cloud to cloud in response to real-time conditions. Applications
can be failed over to operational clouds should a cloud service be broken. Only in this way can an
application be made resilient.
Summary
Cloud computing is an entirely new method for application processing. We are still in the early stages of
using this environment. The resiliency of applications moved to a cloud is of paramount importance. If a
cloud should fail, the application must be rapidly recovered either by recovering the failed cloud or by
moving the application to a surviving cloud. A high degree of resiliency results in minimum downtime and
maximum availability for the application.
As time goes on, techniques will be further refined for cloud computing; and the management of
applications running in the cloud will grow more straightforward. Application resiliency will improve as it
becomes easier to move applications within or between clouds.
Acknowledgements
Information for this article was taken from the following sources:
Resiliency in the age of cloud services, Network World; November 27, 2017.
Cloud services: building resiliency and business continuity, Cloud Blogs; January 17, 2013.
End-To-End Resiliency In A Hybrid Cloud World, Forbes; October 7, 2016.
Cloud availability and resiliency: Planning for failure, Tech Target; July 29, 2011.
Resiliency, WhatIsCloud.com; undated.
4
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman
