– Our November Twitter Feed of Outages
November 2017
A challenge every issue for the Availability Digest is to determine which of the many
availability topics out there win coveted status as Digest articles. We always regret not
focusing our attention on the topics we bypass. With our new Twitter presence, we don’t
have to feel guilty. This article highlights some of the tweets that made headlines in
recent days.
How forgetting to renew a domain name cost $3m
GoDaddy does it. Name.com does it. Namecheap does it. Amazon Web Services does it. HostGator does
it. The wackily named CrazyDomains.com.au isn’t all that crazy: it does it, too. They all offer auto-renewal
of domain names. In fact, it’s hard to find any registrar that doesn’t. But perhaps Sorenson
Communications found one. Or then again, perhaps employees’ calendars all broke down simultaneously
and failed to send reminders that the domain renewal was coming due. However, it happened, the Utah-
based telco neglected to renew its domain. So, as these things go, it slipped silently off the Internet.
https://t.co/SbB6rtTpeO
Air National Guard restores FAA capabilities for Puerto Rico
A week and a half post Hurricane Maria, it is hard to tell the Federal Aviation Administration was at
“ground zero” and in the dark with no power or communication capabilities. Now, the air traffic flow at San
Juan Luis Munoz Marin International Airport is back to normal thanks to the Air National Guard stepping
in to help the FAA and to restore air operations for the island.
https://t.co/3ochE2tlBZ
The Sky Fell in Puerto Rico. The Microgrid Argument is not Chicken Little
Hurricane Maria showed that warnings about the vulnerabilities of centralized electric grids – and the
need for microgrid development — are not overstated. When the hurricane hit the U.S. territory on
September 20th, it knocked out power to 100 percent of 1.57 million accounts served by the Puerto Rico
Electric Power Authority (PREPA), the island’s utility. Things were not much better 10 days later — 95
percent of the accounts remained without power. Worse, the destruction is so massive, with 80 percent of
the island’s transmission and distribution system destroyed, that power may not be fully restored to the
island’s 3.4 million people until next year. In fact, the Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority (PREPA), the
island’s utility, is warning that 50 percent of customers may still be without power two or three months
from now.
https://t.co/jXhy9PCHOz
1
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Oracle debuts autonomous cloud database for data warehouse workloads
Oracle has launched an autonomous cloud database capable of patching cybersecurity weaknesses on
its own accord. Oracle Autonomous Database Cloud uses machine learning to eliminate human
maintenance and error, offering self-driving, self-scaling and self-repairing database functions. The
company claims performance 10 times faster than and half the cost of Amazon's RedShift system. The
autonomous cloud service offers customer simpler service and instant elasticity. The database comes
with a 99.995% availability guarantee.
https://t.co/0POnC5qvd3
Grounded NOAA Hurricane Hunter Plane Has No Backup With 2 Months of Hurricane Season Left
With more than two months of the Atlantic hurricane season left, NOAA’s Hurricane Hunters have
grounded the Gulfstream IV aircraft that flies over storms at high altitudes to gather data.
"Unbelievably, there is no backup," Florida Sen. Bill Nelson (D-FL) told the Palm Beach Post. "I’ve
sounded the alarm on this until I’m blue in the face. The administration simply must act."
The plane, nicknamed Gonzo, suffered a series of three malfunctions in a period of eight days.
https://t.co/kn9cGf1YRx
Equifax's disastrous Struts patching blunder: THOUSANDS of other orgs did it too
Thousands of companies may be susceptible to the same type of hack that recently struck Equifax.
The Equifax breach was the result of a vulnerable Apache Struts component. Software automation
vendor Sonatype warns that 3,054 organisations downloaded the same Struts2 component exploited in
the Equifax hack in the last 12 months. Additionally, more than 46,000 organisations downloaded
versions of Struts and/or its sub-projects with known vulnerabilities despite perfectly safe versions being
available. Altogether, upwards of 50,000 organisations might be vulnerable to attack.
https://t.co/L0oYUQhpPp
What’s the Difference between Reliability and Resilience?
The ability to keep the lights on in the event of a cyber-incident is a major concern for the electric sector.
Power grid resilience and power grid reliability are both frequently, and often interchangeably, referenced
in conversations about keeping the lights on. This begs the question: what is the difference between
reliability and resilience? This brief describes the difference between reliability and resilience in relation to
cyber-incidents and the power grid.
https://t.co/UtGSa3Eo57
AI to Help Power Grids Resist Disruptions
The U.S. Department of Energy will explore whether artificial intelligence can help electric grids handle
power fluctuations, avoid failures, resist damage, and recover faster from major storms, cyberattacks,
solar flares and other disruptions. A new project, called GRIP, for Grid Resilience and Intelligence Project,
has been awarded up to $6 million over three years by the U.S. Department of Energy. GRIP is the first
project to use artificial intelligence (AI) to help power grids deal with disturbances. It will develop
algorithms to learn how power grids work by analyzing smart meter data, utility-scale SCADA (supervisory
2
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

control and data acquisition) data, electric vehicle charging data, and even satellite and street-view
imagery.
https://t.co/GUrL1AKfHp
HPE’s Spaceborne computer successfully powers up in space
Mark Fernandez, HPE Americas technology officer, discusses the successful launch to and installation of
HPE’s Spaceborn Computer on the International Space Station. The computer is the first high-
performance commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) computer system to run one teraFLOP in space.
https://t.co/FNSho0T8Qz
Microsoft Debuts Azure Availability Zones to Reduce Outage Risk
Microsoft wants to take the worry out of deploying critical applications on its Azure cloud computing
platform with Azure Availability Zones, a new high availability service. "Availability Zones increase Azure's
resiliency capabilities and broaden options for customers to choose the business continuity solution that
is right for their organization," explained Tom Keane, head of Global Infrastructure at Microsoft Azure.
"We've also designed Availability Zones to give customers great confidence in delivering services with an
industry-leading, financially-backed 99.99 percent virtual machines uptime SLA [service-level agreement]
when generally available."
http://bit.ly/2hu15ii
How did cell carriers hold up during Irma? They don’t have to tell you
On the day after Hurricane Irma tore through Florida, more than one in four cellphone towers in the state
were out of service, a worse knockout than hurricanes Sandy and Harvey inflicted. But if you want to
know how well each cellphone carrier handled the storm, you’re out of luck. A 4-year-old proposal to
require America’s cell carriers to publicly disclose how well they withstand and recover from major storms
has languished.
https://t.co/hR9JBGf5Jw
Vodafone internet DOWN: Broadband services hit with SEVERE server issues across UK
Vodafone Internet customers suffered an impromptu Broadband outage in late September. The issue
affected users up and down the UK with no specific region hit.
https://t.co/nFeneMkiF5
Hackers exploit vendor trust in worm-like malware attack on CCleaner
CCleaner, a popular system maintenance tool for Microsoft Windows devices, had a malicious
malware implanted in its software, according to security researchers at Cisco Talos. The attack is
said to have impacted 2.27 million users.
https://t.co/ViO1bFc5jO
3
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

14 Challenges/Strategies When Upgrading Your Legacy Platforms
As the technology your business currently uses outpaces itself, there comes a time when you need to
integrate a new platform into your company operations. With 2017 showing a flat projection for IT
spending at most companies, now may not be the best time to add new IT initiatives. But it may be the
ideal time to incorporate new technologies into your legacy systems to modernize and update them.
https://t.co/rOEyoPLeAG
Puerto Rico's power company was already bankrupt. Then Maria hit.
Hurricane Maria has dealt a new blow to Puerto Rico's bankrupt electric company - causing widespread
power outages and imposing costly repairs on a utility that was already struggling with more than $9
billion in debt, poor service and sky-high rates. And that means more hardship for local residents, whose
electric rates are already more than twice the national average.
https://t.co/imGtT9J3FU
Veeam helps BankservAfrica save on backup.
Following its investment in new data centres and disaster recovery strategies, BankservAfrica, the largest
automated clearing house and payment system operator in Africa, contracted Veeam® Software to
modernise its backup and data protection systems. Processing billions of transactions annually for 23
banks and their 27-million customers while maintaining the safety and security of the South African
National Payment System, BankservAfrica aims to provide real-time, continuous payment processing to
ensure participating banks can service their customers around the clock.
https://t.co/vWYW7IkaCQ
New-look $10 note rejected by vending, poker machines and supermarkets
The new-look Australian $10 note has been spat out by vending machines, self-serve checkouts, and
poker machines in what has turned into a repeat of last year's $5 bill roll-out disaster. The brand new $10
note complete with high-tech security features was released in late September, despite fears it would be
rejected by machines across the country. When the new banknote was purchased from the Reserve Bank
of Australia, it was subjected to tests across Sydney. And while it passed some, it failed most.
https://t.co/jZ3FEQxe8p
Smarter networks make smarter airports
Historically, airport operators have deployed and managed separate networks to support multiple use
cases at the airport – including multiple operational wireless and wireline solutions as well as networks to
support passenger services. These networks have typically been deployed at different times, built with
different technologies, and managed by different departments. Is it any surprise that the network
infrastructure has become unwieldy to manage and costly to operate? In light of this reality, airports are
increasingly looking to move to a single, converged network to support all of their communication needs
with strict data traffic segregation capabilities, service prioritization and predictable performance
independent of scale.
https://t.co/8hQS8AEEtl
4
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Beyond Lights-Out: Future Data Centers Will Be Human-Free
The idea of a “lights-out” data center is not new, but it is evolving. Operators such as Hewlett Packard
Enterprise and AOL have been long-term proponents of remote monitoring and management to reduce,
or entirely replace, the need for dedicated on-site staff. The most well-known current advocate is
probably colocation provider EdgeConneX that has integrated a lights-out approach into the fabric of its
business.
https://t.co/RDyeXh5pKf
The Internet's security key is about to change, and you could get locked out
For the first time ever, the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) is about to
change the cryptographic keys that help secure the system which helps organise the Internet with the
allotment of domain names such as .com, .org and .net - the Domain Name System (DNS).
This will ensure a safer Internet. But if network operators, Internet service providers and small networks
do not make a small upgrade to their systems, they could end up getting locked out of the Internet, when
the keys are changed on October 11, 2017.
https://t.co/yoYewPzz3u
The First Major Network Crash, the Four-Hour Collapse of the ARPANET
On October 27, 1980, the Arpanet collapsed. The ARPANET, predecessor of the modern Internet, was
set up by the Department of Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA). Initially, it linked
four sites in California and Utah and later was expanded to cover research centers across the country.
The network failure resulted from a redundant single-error detecting code that was used for transmission
but not storage and a garbage-collection algorithm for removing old messages that was not resistant to
the simultaneous existence of one message with several different time stamps. The combination of the
events took the network down for four hours.
https://t.co/kzXZpkZSqF
The Equifax Breach and 5 Years of Missed Warning Signs
In a keyword search through 5 years’ worth of Equifax annual reports, terms that would suggest adequate
risk awareness, such as risk management, cyber risk, privacy, data security, data breach or information
security, barely appear at all. In fact, the term cyber risk does not appear once in any of the credit
bureaus’ annual reports in the last 5 years.
https://t.co/E1iG2UVCLB
Why You Need to Eliminate Your Single Point of Failure
A single point of failure, SPoF, in your business can literally devastate your business overnight; yet many
business leaders spend little or no time at all protecting their business against these risks! In 1995, a
rogue trader brought down Barings Bank through fraudulent, unauthorized, speculative trading. The bank,
which had been established in 1762, had a single point of failure and did not have controls in place to
protect itself. Its SPoF destroyed it!
https://t.co/TKvEKnYlbn
5
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

What If Your Colo Fails: Preventing Disaster
Although a data center network is designed not to fail, it does happen. When it does, it puts data owners
in a precarious situation—especially when it’s a colocation facility (colo) that goes down.
As recent situations have illustrated, the ramifications of a colo outage can be devastating. Case in point:
two outages in U.K. data centers in July operated by one of the world’s largest communications and colo
providers reportedly took down 10 percent of voice and data traffic in and around London for more than
four hours. Unfortunately for the businesses who operated out of those data centers, their mistaken
assumptions that they had secured their data in a stable environment led to consequences.
https://t.co/8b2yOQihJx
Auckland Airport’s Jet Fuel Supply Vulnerability is Well Known and Serious
For years, different companies have been warning the New Zealand government that Auckland has a
single point of failure when it comes to getting fuel. A single ten-inch pipe is responsible for getting most
all fuel into New Zealand’s largest city. Not just aviation fuel – petrol and diesel as well. In the middle of
September, a farmer digging up swam kauri damaged the pipeline; and it could be out of action for
weeks.
https://t.co/vveYUwVcM4
Safeguarding the Virtual Infrastructure from a Single Point of Failure
As Mark Twain said, “Put all your eggs in one basket and then watch the basket,” defines the clear
implementation of redundant techniques to the virtual infrastructure, where the virtual infrastructure is a
basket. It must contain the ability to boost the capacity of multiple hardware or software systems to
function as a single logical unit with no signs of Single Points of Failure.
http://bit.ly/2inco0s
Interesting article - "A Flaw in the Design"
David D. Clark, an MIT scientist whose air of genial wisdom earned him the nickname “Albus
Dumbledore,” can remember exactly when he grasped the Internet’s dark side. He was presiding over a
meeting of network engineers when news broke that a dangerous computer worm — the first to spread
widely — was slithering across the wires.
https://t.co/oofDYjU6ef
6
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman
