Is the Cost of Converting to Active/Active Worth It?
November2009
Active/active systems can bring continuous availability to applications that simply cannot be
down. But converting your current active/backup system to active/active comes with a cost.
Hardwaremayhavetobeupgraded,datareplicationengineslicensed,andapplicationsmodified.
These costs are offset bythe virtual elimination of both unplanned and planned downtime. But is
the cost of conversion worth it? That all depends upon how much your current downtime is
costingyou.
In this article, we take a look at the costs of moving to active/active. We give two examples of
determining whether these costs are justified based on the downtime savings afforded by an
active/activearchitecture.
What is Active/Active?
For those of you to whom the concept of
active/active is new, we first review the
fundamentals of an active/active architecture.1 An
node1
active/active system is a network of independent node2
geographically-distributed processing nodes appl appl
A
cooperating in a common application. Each node A
has access to a copy of the application database, active
active
and a transaction can be routed to any node for
data
processing.
data base
base
The database copies are kept in synchronism via
data replication. Whenever one node makes a redundant
replication
change to its copy of the database, this change is
network
immediately replicated to all other database copies
in the application network. In this way, all nodes
haveaccesstoanup-to-dateapplicationdatabase.
node3
data appl
Should a node fail, all that needs to be done is to
base A
rerouteusers from thefailednodetooneor moreof
the surviving nodes. This rerouting can be active
accomplished in seconds or even subseconds. If
this failover is fast enough, users will not even notice that there has been a failure and so, in
effect,therehasbeennooutage.
1WhatisActive/Active?,AvailabilityDigest;October2006.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0101/what_is_active-active.pdf
1
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Furthermore,itisknownthatthenodetowhichusersarereroutedisupandrunning.Afterall,itis
currentlyprocessing transactions. Thus, failover is fast and reliable, and continuous availability is
achieved.
The Costs of Going Active/Active
There are several costs to be considered if you want to convert a critical application to take
advantage of the continuous availability of an active/active configuration. Below is a brief look at
manyofthesecosts.
ASecondSite
AdditionalFacilities
If your application is mission-critical, you probably already have a backup system. Hopefully, it is
in a separate site that is far enough away from your primary system that no common disaster
suchasanearthquake,flood,hurricane,fire,orexplosionwillnegativelyimpactbothsites.
If this is not the case, a major cost of moving to active/active is the acquisition of a remote site
andasecondsystem.Thesecondsystem neednotbeidenticaltotheoriginalsystem,butitmust
be large enough to handle the entire load should the original system fail. (We ignore here the
costs of a multinode system of more than two nodes since, if you are moving from a single
system,yourfirststepismostlikelytoadual-nodeactive/activesystem.)
In addition to the IT costs of a second site and a second system, there are many ancillary costs
forotherfacilitiessuchasequipmentcooling,firesuppression,andsecurity.
Of course, you can implement an active/active system with two nodes collocated in a single site.
Though this will save the cost of a second site, you have given up disaster tolerance – a bad
moveifyourapplicationistrulycriticaltoyourcompany.
AdditionalStaffing
Withthesecondsitecomes theadditionalexpense of additionaltechnicalstaff tomanthatsite.If
you already have a second site, you probably have that staff already in place and trained. If you
are setting up a second site, you can always consider a lights-out site with little or no staffing.
Since you are running active/active with automatic failover, if your lights-out site fails, you have
time to get technical support to that site to correct the failure since your staffed site is fully
operationalandhandlingthefullload.
However, you don’t want to wait too long to restore your failed site to service because, until you
do,youarerunningwithasinglepointoffailure–youronlyoperationalsite.
AdditionalOperatingCosts
Withasecondsitecomesadditionaloperatingcosts suchas lighting,heating,equipmentcooling,
and the associated electric bills. In addition to technical staffing, you may have additional
personnelcostssuchasforadministrationandsecurity.
AdditionalLicenses
Even if your primarysystem vendor was giving you a break on licenses because you were using
one system only as a backup, that break will now disappear because both systems will be in
activeuse.
2
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

ReplicationEngine
Inorder tokeepthetwodatabasecopies synchronized, youwillhaveto licensea datareplication
engine. This should be a carefully considered choice. Data replication comes with certain
problems.
If you are using asynchronous replication,2 in which data changes are replicated to the target
system after they have been made to the source system, replication latency is an important
attribute. Replication latency is the time delayfrom when a change is made to the source system
to the time that it is made to the target system. The longer the replication latency, the more data
willbelostshouldthesourcenodefail.
Also, data collisions are more likely. A data collision3 occurs when both nodes try to update the
same data item within the replication latency interval. Neither node will know of the other’s
change, and the database copies may begin to diverge. It is important that if data collisions are
possible in the application, the replication engine has facilities for detecting and resolving these
collisions.
An alternative to asynchronous replication is synchronous replication.4 Synchronous replication
enginesensurethateachchangeismadetoalldatabasecopiesintheapplicationnetworkorthat
no copies are modified. Synchronous replication avoids the problems of data loss and data
collisions associated with asynchronous replication. However, applications are slowed as they
waitforchangestobeappliedacrosstheapplicationnetwork.
RedundantReplicationNetworks
The copies of the application database are kept synchronized by replication changes across a
communication network. This network must be very reliable, for if it fails, replication fails. If
nothing is done, each node will continue to process transactions but will not be able to replicate
its changes to the other system. The result is that the two database copies will begin to diverge.
This is called split-brain mode.When the network is restored, the changes made to the database
copies during the outage will have to be reconciled, and many data collisions are likely to have
occurred.
The alternative is to shut down one of the nodes and run with only one node, facing the
consequencesofafailureofthatnode.
To avoid this problem, the replication network should be redundant. If one rail of the replication
networkshouldfail,replicationcancontinueoverthesurvivingrail.
RedundantUserNetworks
A key to the continuous availability provided by an active/active system is the ability to switch
users or transactions from adownednodeto anoperatingnode.However,this couldbethwarted
bya communication failure in the network interconnecting the users with the processing nodes. It
is important that this network be redundant and reliable so that users can always have access to
anoperatingnodeinthepresenceofanysinglenodeornetworkfault.
2AsynchronousReplicationEngines,AvailabilityDigest;November2006.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/private/0102/asynchronous_replication.pdf
3CollisionDetectionandResolution;AvailabilityDigest;April2007.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/private/0204/collisions.pdf
4SynchronousReplication,AvailabilityDigest;November2006.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/private/0102/asynchronous_replication.pdf
3
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

AdditionalApplicationSoftwareLicenses
If you are running third party applications, you will probablyhave to payadditional license fees to
rundualcopiesoftheapplications.
ApplicationModifications
Your applications wereprobablynotdesignedtoruninadistributedenvironment.Once youtryto
runmultiplecooperatingcopiesofanapplication,severalproblemscouldraisetheiruglyheads:5
 If data collisions can happen, strategies for resolving them must be determined and
implemented.
 Unique number generators used, for instance, to create customer numbers or invoice
numberswillnolongerbeuniquewhenrunningmultiplecopiesindifferentsystems.
 Depending upon the replication engine used, read-only locks maynot be replicated. This
couldmakeineffectiveintelligentlockingprotocolsdesignedtopreventdeadlocks.
 Globallockssuchasmutexesheldbyoneofthenodesmayhavetobeimplemented.
 Memory-resident context used by successive transactions may be insufficient if
subsequenttransactionscanberoutedtoeithernode.
 It must be ensured that batch runs initiated by an application are not duplicated on the
nodes.
 A means for distributing transactions between the nodes must be determined. This may
haveanimpactontheapplication.
DistributedManagementTools
Managing a distributed system with distributed applications is a much more complex technical
task than managing a single system. Good distributed system management and distributed
applicationmanagementtoolsmustbelicensedandyourtechnicalstafftrainedintheiruse.
Testing
Before deploying your new active/active solution, the system must be thoroughly tested. This
couldtakemanyman-months.
Insurance
The additional site and equipment may increase your insurance premiums. On the other hand,
the increased reliability and integrity of your applications may significantly reduce the amount of
liabilityinsurancethatyoumustcarry.
5MigratingYourApplicationtoActive/Active,AvailabilityDigest;March2007.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/private/0203/aa_ready.pdf
Appendix4,AConsultant’sCritique,BreakingtheAvailabilityBarrierIII:Active/ActiveSystemsinPractice,AuthorHouse;
2007.
4
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

CostofMoney
Finally, all of these costs must be financed. The cost of money should be a component of the
overallconversioncost.
The Cost of Downtime
The cost of downtime is simple to calculate. It is the product of the value of a transaction, the
transactionrate,andtheexpecteddowntime:
Costofdowntimeperyear=(valueoftx)(tx/hour)(downtimehours/year)
Actually, this equation must be evaluated for every critical transaction handled by the application
andthesecostssummed.
We say that this calculation is simple, and it is if you know the values to plug into the equation.
Presumably, you know how much a transaction is worth to you and what your transaction rates
areatdifferenttimes duringtheday.Onecomplexityis thatatransaction’s value maynotonlybe
measurable financially but may have other implications such as loss of customers, regulatory
action,badpublicity,orthelossoflifeorproperty.
This leaves your downtime. Hopefully, you have kept a good record of your downtime over the
years. This should have included the date, time, duration and cause of each outage. If you
haven’t done so, now is the time to start as you make an educated guess as to how much
downtimeyousufferinayear.
Cost/Benefit Analysis
Let us assume that you can get a handle on downtime parameters and the costs of going
active/active. Is the move worth it? We consider two simple examples to demonstrate the
cost/benefitapproach.
OnlineRetailStore
Thefirstexampleisthatof asmallonlineretailstore.Itsaveragesaleis$100,andthestoreuses
astandardmarkupof20%forprofit.Therefore,anaveragetransactionisworth$20tothestore.
The store makes about 100 sales per hour and will consequently lose $2,000 per hour if its
system is down. It is currently running an x86 Linux server that seems to go down twice a year
and requires about five hours to bring back to life (sometimes a one-hour reboot, sometimes a
one-daypartsreplacement).
Thus, it suffers about ten hours of downtime per year at a cost of $2,000 per hour. Therefore, its
annual downtime cost is $20,000. This does not include ancillary costs such as the loss of
customers,butthestorefeelsthatitisuniqueenoughthatitscustomerswillremainloyal.
To go active/active, the store owner finds that he can lease time on a managed system in a local
data center for $1,000/month. He is quite fortunate in that an expanded version of the third-party
shoppingcartthatheisusingisavailabletoruninadistributedenvironment,butthiswillincrease
his application license fee by $800/month for the more powerful version running on two systems.
He does not feel that he needs redundant networks, but a dedicated line required between the
twosystemsforreplicationwillcostanother$400/month.
Thus, he can move to an active/active system for an estimated cost of $2,200 per month, or
$26,400 per year. Sincethis willsavehim anestimated$20,000per year,it is probablynot worth
5
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

makingthemove.The one caveatis customer loss.If this is arealconcern,thesmallincrease in
thecostofmovingtoactive/activemaybejustified.
BrokerageSystem
Our next example is a major brokerage firm that uses a cluster of large Windows servers for its
trading system. The system accepts online trades, forwards them to the appropriate exchanges
forexecution,andreturnsexecutionreportstothecustomers.
Its average trade is $50,000, on which it makes an average commission of 2%. Thus, each
transactionisworthanaverageof$1,000.
The firm executes an average of five transactions per second, or 18,000 transactions per hour,
duringthetradingday.Thus,itsdowntimecostis$18millionperhour!
Thatiswhyitruns itstradingsystem onahigh-availabilitycluster.Itsexperienceoverthelastfew
years is that it is achieving almost five 9s of availability from its cluster, which is down for an
averageof6minutes(0.1hours)peryear.Thus,itsannualdowntimecostis$1,800,000.
The firm has determined that it will cost an initial $1,400,000 to move to an active/active system
plus additional operating expenses of $250,000 per year. One interesting question to ask is to
what extent would it have to reduce its downtime in order to have a one-year return-on-
investment(ROI)?
Its cost of downtime for the first year, including facilities investment and operating expenses, is
$1,650,000. Its annual costof downtime,as calculated above,is $1,800,000.If it could reduce its
annualdowntimefromsixminutestojust30seconds,itsannualdowntimecostwouldbereduced
to $150,000. This leads to a breakeven at the end of the first year. Thereafter, annual savings
wouldaccruetomorethanamilliondollarsayear.
Ourmythicalfirm implementeditsactive/activesystem andfoundthatitisachievinglessthanten
seconds per year of downtime, which is a downtime cost of $50,000 per year. Coupled with the
$250,000 increase in operating expenses, the firm is now spending $300,000 per year instead of
$1,800,000per yearfordowntime.
These are big numbers, but are they reasonable? September 8, 2008, just after the U.S.
government announced its massive bailout of banks, promised to be one of the busiest trading
days of the year. At 9:15 that morning, the London Stock Exchange crashed and didn’t come
back up until 4 that afternoon. Brokerage firms suffered an average of £700,000 each in lost
commissions,totalinghundredsofmillionsofpoundsoveralloftheLondonbrokeragefirms.6The
LSE had recently switched from its NonStop systems to a network of PCs. If instead they had
movedtoanactive/activesystem,millionsofpoundswouldhavebeensaved.
Summary
Determining whether or not to move to an active/active configuration to support your most critical
applications requires some important input – what will the move cost you initially and in ongoing
operationalexpenses,andhowmuchdoesdowntimecostyou.
Thisinformationmayrequiresomeefforttoestimateaccurately.Butonce youhavethesefigures,
the determination is quite straightforward. Knowing your initial and ongoing costs and your
6LondonStockExchangePC-TradingSystemDownforaDay,AvailabilityDigest;October2008.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0310/london_stock_exchange.pdf
6
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

estimated savings, you can determine your ROI and can then make the determination as to
whetheramovetoactive/activeisrightforyourcompany.
7
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com