OpenVMS Support To Continue Indefinitely
August2014
OpenVMS, developed byDigital Equipment Corporation and acquired byHP via a series
of acquisitions, began life as VAX/VMS in 1977. It has been running mission-critical
systemsforoverthreedecades.
In June, 2013, HP released its updated roadmap for OpenVMS.1 To the consternation of OpenVMS
users, HP announced a schedule for the end of support for OpenVMS. The current version of OpenVMS,
version 8.4, would be supported on HP Integrity i2 systems at least until 2020; and mature product
support without sustaining engineering (i.e., no new patches) would be extended through at least 2025.
OpenVMSwouldnotbemigratedtoHPIntegrityi4systemsusingthePoulsoneight-coreItaniumchips.
HP has now corrected this situation. OpenVMS will be ported to new HP systems and will be supported
indefinitely.HPaccomplishedthisbycompletingaperpetualandexclusivelicensingagreementwithVMS
Software,Inc.(VSI)toextendindefinitelythelifespanofOpenVMS.
The VSI Licensing Agreement
Under the licensing agreement with HP, VSI will be the sole developer of future versions of OpenVMS.
VSI will produce new versions of OpenVMS for the HP Itanium i4 systems and for the next version of
Itanium servers scheduled to use the Kittson Intel chip. It will also develop an OpenVMS version to
supportx86HPservers.
HP will continue to sell and support the current (version 8.4) and previous versions of OpenVMS
accordingtoitspublishedproductandservicesroadmaps.BothHPandVSI willsellVSI’sfuturereleases
of OpenVMS, and both will support OpenVMS on HP Integrity i4 services. HP will announce future
supportplansasVSIdevelopsnewversions.
Current (v8.4) and previous versions of OpenVMS cannot be purchased from VSI. They must be
purchased through HP. However, when HP ends support for a version, VSI will offer support for that
version.
HP will install VSI versions of OpenVMS (beyond v8.4) on future models of HP servers (beyond i2) if
specifiedinacustomer’spurchaseorder.
VSIlicensingforitsversionsofOpenVMSwillbethesameasHP’slicensingagreementsforHP8.4oni2
servers. The VSI versions will be licensed on a per-socket basis except for certain layered products that
willbelicensedperconcurrentuser.
1UpdatedOpenVMSRoadmapandHPLetter,OpenVMS.org;June6,2013.
1
©2014SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

TheVSIOpenVMSroadmapcanbefoundat
http://www.vmssoftware.com/news/announcement/RM/VMS_Software_Roadmap.pdf. The roadmap
shows the development of OpenVMS for HP Integrity i4 servers first, followed by Kittson HP servers and
thenbyx86HPservers.
VSI
VMS Software, Inc. (www.vmssoftware.com) is headquartered in Bolton,
Massachusetts, outside of Boston near Maynard, Massachusetts, the former
homeofDigitalEquipmentCorp.
VSI is a new company with old roots. It was recentlyformed bya group of investors and executives from
Nemonix,acompanythat has providedOpenVMS supportfor the older VAX and Alphasystemsfor thirty
years. VSI has assembled an on-shore team of veteran OpenVMS developers, many of whom date back
totheDECdays.
AccordingtoVSI’swebsite,
“Our mission is to develop, sell, and support innovative and advanced releases of OpenVMS, the
most secure operating system on the planet. We are engaged in this mission with one core
motivation: to support and enable our customers in running their mission critical applications at the
legendary uptime levels OpenVMS is known for, at maximum performance levels, today and into the
future.”
Answering User Concerns
The concerns of OpenVMS users about the ultimate termination of support for the venerable operating
system were recently voiced in an open letter from the French OpenVMS Users Group to Meg Whitman,
CEOofHP.Theletterreadsinpart:
“"It is impossible to think that HP could not activelymaintain support for dependable systems that are
such an important part of its portfolio. OpenVMS is one of its most crucial systems in quality and
industrial impact. Like other major IT players, HP must adapt itself to different speeds and varying
policiesbetweenlarge,fast-pacedmarketsandspecialized,slower-pacedmarkets.
"These software products are the result of decades of precise programming, inscribed in precise
coding imperative for such functional necessities. A majority of them use functions specific to
OpenVMSandstillrunonOpenVMS,asthesecustomfeaturesarehardtofindelsewhere."
Interestingly, the letter was posted just days before HP’s announcement about its VSI partnership.
Fortunately, HP did not need this sort of encouragement in order to see the importance of the future of
OpenVMS.
Summary
After a year of anguish from HP’s first announcement of the OpenVMS sunset, HP has now made a U-
turn. It has guaranteed the continuing usefulness of one of its most revered operating systems.With this
assurance in mind, customers now can continue to implement their mission-critical environments with
OpenVMSoncurrentandfutureHPservergenerations.
2
©2014SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com