Boeing 787 Could Lose All Power
June2015
The 787 Dreamliner is The Boeing Company’s newest addition to its fleet. Unfortunately,
it has been plagued with problems. The latest is a software bug, discovered by Boeing,
thatcouldcauselossofallelectricalpower,potentiallyshuttingdownbothengines.
The Boeing 787 Dreamliner
The Boeing 787 Dreamliner is a mid-size, wide-body replacement for the
Boeing 767 and seats up to 335 passengers. The plane entered service in
October, 2011, with All Nippon Airways. So far, Boeing has delivered 264
787s,including28toU.S.airlines.
A major goal of Boeing in the development of the 787 was to improve fuel
efficiency. Boeing intended the 787 to be 20% more fuel-efficient than the
767 airliner it was replacing. To achieve this objective, Boeing used carbon
composite materials as the primary material in the construction of the 787’s airframe, significantly
reducingtheweightoftheplane.
In addition, many mechanical components were replaced with electrical systems to save weight. As a
result,allmajor systems intheplanearenowelectricallyoperated.For instance,controlservices suchas
theailerons,elevator,andtailthatpreviouslywerepneumaticallyoperatedarenowelectricallyoperated.
The Plane’s Electrical Generation System
Withthe787’s heavydependence on its electricalsystem,Boeing went to extraordinarymeasures toadd
redundancy so that the continuous availability of electrical power was assured. The plane uses six
electrical generators. Two 250-kilowatt generators are mounted on each of its two engines, and two
others serve as backups. These generators provide control for avionics, pressurization, de-icing, and all
oftheotherimportantfunctionsrequiredforthesafetyofflight.
Even if all of these generators failed, a lithium-ion battery supplies power for about six seconds. It is
enough time to deploy an air-operated ram turbine that can deliver the minimum electrical power needed
to keep the engines running and the avionics operating so that the airliner can fly safely to the nearest
airportandland.
Each generator is linked to a control unit. However, all the redundancy in the world is useless if the
designincludesasinglepointoffailure.Inthecaseofthe787,thesinglepointoffailureisthesoftwarein
thecontrolunit.
1
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

A Software Error Could Shut Down the Engines
In lab testing years after its first delivery of 787s, Boeing discovered a software error in the generator
control unit. The error could result in a total loss of electrical power to the aircraft, even in flight. The
condition occurred if electrical power were left on for about eight months without being turned off. More
specifically,theproblembecameexistentonthe248thdayofcontinuouselectricalpower.
Withitsextendeddependenceonelectricalsystems,the787couldexperiencealossofcontrolifitlostall
electrical power. Loss of control of the airplane could occur during any phase of flight, including takeoff,
landing, or while maneuvering in the air. Control loss during takeoff or landing could be particularly
catastrophic.
Why would any airline keep its airplanes powered up for such a long period of time? When the 787 was
first delivered, customers discovered that the airliner issued a series of erroneous nuisance messages
when it was first powered up. Boeing recommended that the airlines power up the 787 earlier for a flight
than they otherwise might to avoid this condition. As a result, manyairlines simplykept their Dreamliners
poweredupcontinuouslyuntiltheirnextmaintenanceintervals.
Fortunately, according to Boeing’s records, the electrical power for all 787s currently in service has been
turnedoff as partof routinemaintenanceapproximatelyeveryfour months.Themaintenanceintervals for
the airliner have been much shorter than the eight-month trigger point, so the problem of electrical power
losshasneverbeenexperiencedbyanairline.
The FAA’s Airworthiness Directive
In response to Boeing’s discovery, the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) has published an
AirworthinessDirective(AD)ordering787operatorstoperiodicallyshutdowntheplane’selectricalpower.
TheADrequiresthat787electricalpowermustberecycledatleastevery120days.
AccordingtoanFAAstatement,
“Weareissuing this AD to prevent loss of all AC electricalpower, whichcouldresultin loss of control
of the airplane. If the four main generator control units (associated with the engine-mounted
generators) were powered up at the same time, after 248 days of continuous power, all four GCUs
will go into failsafe mode at the same time, resulting in loss of all AC electrical power regardless of
flightphase.”
ABoeingspokespersonstatedthat:
“The airworthiness directive action addresses a condition that only occurred in the lab. Simulated
testing determined that this condition is possible in cases where an airplane’s power is left on for
morethaneightcontinuousmonths.Noairplaneinthefleetexperiencedthatcondition.”
The Fix
Boeing’sonlycommentrelatedtothecauseoftheproblemwasthat:
“This condition is caused by a software counter internal to the GCUs that will overflow after 248 days
ofcontinuouspower.”
Speculation is that the software bug is a signed 32-bit integer overflow that is triggered after 231
centiseconds,or248.55days.
2
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Boeing is working on a software upgrade for the generator control units, and the upgrade should rectify
thebug.Thefixisexpectedtobeavailableduringthefourthquarterof2015.
Other Problems Have Plagued the 787
The lithium-ion batteryused as part of the 787’s generator backup
system has also presented a problem for the 787. The entire fleet
of 787s was grounded for more than three months in 2013 after
two fires and several smoke incidents were associated with the
batteries. One incident was a fire that occurred in a Japan Airlines
787 parked at Boston’s Logan International Airport. Boeing had to
redesigntheinternalfuelcellsforthebatteryas wellasthebattery
casing.
Lithium batteries can be a fire hazard since, unlike other
rechargeable batteries, they contain a flammable electrolyte and
arealsokeptpressurized.
Summary
Despite its problems, the 787 Dreamliner remains a mainstay of the Boeing fleet. Although teething
problemsarecommonwithinthefirstyearofanewaircraftdesign's life,thethree-monthgroundingofthe
787fleetwasthefirstsuchgroundingsincethatoftheMcDonnellDouglasDC-10in1979.
The problems faced by the 787 were generally the result of a major shift in airliner design away from
mechanicalcontrolstoelectricalcontrols inordertosaveweight.Thisis atrendthatissuretocontinuein
airlinerdesign,aidednowbytheexperienceofthe787’sshiftindesignphilosophy.
The Availability Digest reported a similar problem associated with the use of an internal intranet for
interconnecting the plane’s avionics controls and the passenger cabin controls.1 Some claim that the
intranet can be hacked by passengers to take over control of the plane. The 787 is one of the main
suspectsinthisthreat.
Acknowledgements
Materialforthisarticlewastakenfromthefollowingsources:
F.A.A.OrdersFixforPossiblePowerLossinBoeing787,N.Y.Times;April30,2015.
FAAproposesfixforpossiblepowerlossissueinBoeing’s787,Reuters;April30,2015.
FAAsaystotallossofpowerariskonBoeing787Dreamliners,WichitaBusinessJournal;May1,2015.
USaviationauthority:Boeing787bugcouldcause‘lossofcontrol’,TheGuardian;May1,2015.
Boeing787Dreamlinerscontainapotentiallycatastrophicsoftwarebug,ArsTechnica;May1,2015.
Boeing 787 Dreamliner: FAA to issue ‘airworthiness directive” in wake of fire, The Guardian; July 22,
2014.
1CanAnAirlinerBeHacked,AvailabilityDigest;May2015.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/1005/airplance_hacking.pdf
3
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com