So You Think Your System is Robust?
August2007
A lot of people are convinced that their systems are robust. Sometimes, however, their best laid
business continuity plans can go astray. The following sad tales are all about those who learned
the hard way that business continuity planning is harder than they thought. And all of these
snafusoccurredtomajorenterprisesinthefirsthalfofthis year,2007.1
The Dow Drops 200 Points in Seconds
Talk about a trader’s nightmare. Tuesday, February 27, 2007, was already a bad day. Shortly
before 3 PM, the Dow Jones Industrial Average, the most closely watched market index, was
already down by 280 points from its open of about 12,450 due to uncertain domestic economic
news and an apparent meltdown in the Chinese economy. Then, within seconds, the index
droppedanother178points.Sucharapiddrophadneveroccurredbefore.
Thesuddendropsenttradersintoasellingfrenzy. The
market was sent into a further tailspin until it started to
recover from a 546 point drop, its largest loss since
9/11.
However, bad as the market drop was, it was not
nearly as precipitous as it appeared. It turned out that
the Dow Jones system that is responsible for
calculating the Industrial Average and 400 other
indices had started to fall behind around 1:50 in the
afternoon. About 2 o’clock, Dow Jones noticed that a
backlog of trades was building up and, suspecting a
computer problem, switched over to a backup system.
It took an hour for the backup to come fully online,
during which time the backlog of trades continued to
grow.
Finally, the backup system became fully functional at
about 3 PM and rapidly processed the last 70 minutes
of trades. The falling market had actually dropped 178 points over the previous hour and ten
minutes, but the sudden processing of the backlog made it appear that this drop had occurred in
thelastfewseconds.
Though Dow Jones management had notified the New York Stock Exchange of the backlog,
evidentlythis messagedid notgettothetraders.Manyof them franticallysold positions that they
normally would not have just to see the market recover in the next hour. This sudden, massive
1
Theinformationforallofthesestorieswastakenfromnewsreportsinthedaysfollowingtheincidents.
1
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

increase in volume overwhelmed the NYSE systems; and trades had to be posted manually.
Exchangestaffworkedovertimetoclearupthebacklog.
The Exchange may face several lawsuits by traders who claimed that they lost their collective
shirtsduetotheerroneousreporting.
US Airways meets Merger Mania
It had been eighteen months since US Airways and Air West had consecrated their merger.
Finally, the new reservation system that would merge the reservation systems of both of the
original airlines, an upgraded version of the Air West reservations system, was ready to be put
online. No longer would Air West passengers have to go to an Air West kiosk at the airport to
check in, nor would US Airways passengers have to go to a US Airways kiosk. All kiosks would
servebothairlines.Furthermore,therewouldbeasingleWebsiteforonlinecheck-in.
Hundreds of newcheck-inkiosks thatcouldhandletheflights for bothairlines hadbeeninstalled.
After much planning and testing, the switchover was scheduled for midnight, Saturday, March 3,
2007. Switchover would take about two hours, during which time the reservation system would
notbeavailable.However,therewerenodomesticflightsatthistimeanyway.
Accordingly, the system was shut down at midnight; and seven million passenger records were
transferred from the old systems to the new reservation system. The new system was brought
onlineinlessthanthescheduledtwohourstothereliefofmanagement.
Then chaos hit. It turned out that the new reservation system worked flawlessly – almost.
Unfortunately,it wouldnot work withthenewkiosks.Theoldkiosksstill werefunctional,butmost
of those that had been installed at the old US Airways hubs – Charlotte, Philadelphia, Boston, as
well as Las Vegas – had been decommissioned. The computer glitch affected 685 kiosks out of
930thatwereinoperation.
As passengers arrived for their flights on Sunday morning at these airports, they found that they
could not check in at the kiosks but rather had to wait in line for an agent. Few agents were
available to meet the unexpected demand, as staffing was still normal. Lines got longer and
longer, and tens of thousands of passengers stood in line for hours. Waits of up to two or three
hours were reported. The airlines did not initially hold planes, and many passengers missed their
flights.Theresult–flaringtempersandoverworkedagents.
USAirwayssentoutanurgentpleatoits passengerstocheck inonlinebeforetheyarrivedatthe
airport.Problemwas,theonlinecheck-infacilitydidnotcomeupuntilSundayafternoon.
In its wisdom, US Airways did at least drop rebooking fees for these hapless passengers. It also
scurried to get additional staff assigned to agent positions and ultimately started holding planes
sothatallcouldmakeitaboard.
By late Tuesday, more than one-half of the affected kiosks were still not working; but lines were
downtoanaverageoften orfifteenminutes duetotheincreaseinstaff.USAirways ordered600
newkioskstoimproveperformance.ThesenewkiosksweredeliveredinJuneandwereaddedto
the800kiosksalreadyinservice.
There is one positive side to this story. Unlike the Blackberry failure described in an earlier
article,2USAirwaysmanagementworkedhardtokeeppassengersinformed.H.TravisChrist,VP
Sales andMarketing,beganpublishingamerger updatesenttoallUS Airways frequentflyers.In
oneissue,hesaid:
2
BlackberryGetsJuiced,AvailabilityDigest;May,2007.
2
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

“You maybe weary of us apologizing for the tough times we had this spring due to the migration
ofourreservationssystems,buthereitis:Wesincerelyapologizeforthenumerousfailures.After
a pretty nice start to the merger, we’ve learned some tough lessons through all this and received
some very helpful advice from many of you, some of which we’re applying and some of which is
unprintable.Sothank youforstickingwithusasweclimbbackonthehorse.”
The Week that Canadians Couldn’t Pay Taxes
The Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) is the Canadian government arm that is responsible for
collecting taxes. Over the last several years, the Internet-savvy Canadians have moved to filing
their taxes online. CRA maintains several online tax filing systems – NETFILE, TELEFILE, and
EFILE–whicharemarketedasconvenient,quick,andutterlyflawless.
Well, maybe “utterly flawless” is a bit of an overstatement since the system went down for ten
days in early March of 2007. Unfortunately, this was the peak filing time for Canadians, whose
returns were due on the 30th of April. During this time, millions of Canadian citizens could not file
their returns online; and additional millions of mailed-in returns stacked up. Refunds due to
Canadiancitizensweregoingtobeseriouslydelayed.
How could this have happened? It seems that a vendor patch was applied Sunday, March 4, to
the CRA’s Advantage CA-IDMS database management system. The patch was intended to
correct an obscure problem which, if encountered, would crash the database management
system. CRA claimed that this patch had been thoroughly tested, but problems started to be
reported shortlyafter thepatchinstallation.It was noticed that irregularities were occurringduring
the transfer of information between the system databases that store each Canadian’s personal
taxinformation.
Unable to resolve the growing problem, the CRA was finally forced to shut down their systems
late Monday night, March 5. As they investigated the problem, they determined that the
erroneous patch had impacted 76 applications comprising 7.5 million lines of code that updated
91differentdatabases.Therecoveryeffortwasmassive.
Over 700 employees worked around the clock to repair the damage. As the department reeled in
crisis, the Revenue Minister was absent on a photo-op with the Prime Minister in Saskatchewan,
despitethepleasforherreturn.
Itwastendaysbeforethesystemcouldberestoredtoservice.
FAA Modernization Takes a Step Backwards
The traffic control systems employed by the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) are
extremely complex, and failures could be life-threatening. Therefore, once a system is put into
serviceandhasproventoworkwell,itstaysthereforalongtime,
Such is the case with the computers in the nation’s Air Route Traffic Control Centers (ARTCCs).
Thesearethetwentycenters thatcontrolflights thataregenerallylonger distance flying at higher
altitudes. The centers use a system called Host to consolidate the radar returns from several
radar sites serving each ARTCC. The Host computers are ten years old, and critical parts are no
longeravailable.Infact,thesystemsarenotevenY2Kcompliant.
The FAA is replacing them under a broad modernization program with a new system called Host
Computer Replacement System, or Hocsr (we applaud the FAA for their imaginative naming
conventions). These systems, supplied by IBM, are not new; but parts are still available. In
3
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
