Whatever your product or service is, you need to prepare your website for heavy visitor spikes.
Examples include: 1) Use Full-Page Caching to Save Resources And Handle The Traffic, 2)
Take Advantage Of Object Caching If You Have Huge Databases, and 3) Use The Latest PHP 7.x
To Make Your Site Faster And Lighter.
https://t.co/fMqQ0aY5l1
Three plead guilty to creating Mirai botnet used to crash web
Three hackers have admitted to building the tools that attackers used to take down many of the
Internet's most popular websites. One of the hackers admitted to writing the source code for Mirai --
malware that created a botnet that took over hundreds of thousands of computers and connected
devices like security cameras and DVRs -- and using it to commit attacks and online fraud.
https://t.co/CRLoyEUTrx
Atlanta airport loses power, trapping travelers in planes and terminals
A huge power outage brought the world's busiest airport to a standstill right before Christmas,
ruining holiday travel for thousands. Atlanta Mayor Kasim Reed said a fire at the main substation
powering the airport triggered the outage and caused the Federal Aviation Administration to put a
ground stop in place, slowing or halting inbound air traffic.
https://t.co/CTgXvd69Bg
5
© 2018 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Norway becomes first country to end national radio broadcasts on FM
Norway has completed its transition to digital radio, becoming the first country in the world to shut
down national broadcasts of its FM network. The country’s most northern regions and the Svalbard
archipelago in the Arctic switched to digital audio broadcasting (DAB) as scheduled. The
transition, which began on 11 January, allows for better sound quality and more channels and
functions at an eighth of the cost of FM radio, according to authorities.
https://t.co/g1ZWMn6ODF
The Bots of Bitcoin
The financial sector has taken steps to prevent computers accidentally bringing down the stock
market; but the 2010 Flash Crash and others that followed underlie the dangers of relying on bots —
or automated trading programs — to manage financial assets. Those bots are now active on
cryptocurrency platforms. It’s possible that if you’ve bought or sold Bitcoin or Ethereum, the buyer
agreeing to take your order was not some cryptocurrency enthusiast in Silicon Valley but a piece of
software on a server in Shanghai. It’s not an entirely new development. In 2013, finance worker
Joseph Lee launched trading platform BTC.sx after having made a reported $150,000 in profit
using scripted trading bots to buy and sell Bitcoin.
https://t.co/P4Xvqj0W0s
Real words or buzzwords? Five Nines
What’s wrong with 99.999% uptime? Recently, the author had several sales people mention high
availability and state that Microsoft Azure guarantees them “five nines” of uptime, referring to their
SaaS (Software as a Service) offering. There are several things wrong with this thinking.
https://t.co/od17GNrCWI
Who knew a tractor could cause so much trouble?
Zimbabweans lost Internet access en masse in early December when a tractor reportedly cut
through key fiber optic cables in South Africa, and another Internet provider experienced
simultaneous issues with its primary Internet conduits. The outage began shortly before Noon local
time and persisted for more than five hours, affecting not only citizens’ day-to-day Internet usage but
also businesses that rely upon web access. And while five Internet-free hours might sound
unfathomable to those of us accustomed to having the web constantly at our fingertips, large-scale
Internet outages—from inadvertent lapses caused by ship anchors to government-calculated
blackouts designed to showcase political power—do happen and more frequently than you thought.
https://t.co/dFdJ5YE9Pw
Security system ‘availability’ jargon buster
Does it really matter if software applications supporting your security systems are only available 99% of
the time? Probably not if you’ve installed a video surveillance system primarily to deter shoplifters.
But the loss of what equates to more than 90 minutes of unplanned downtime per week will be
significant if you’ve invested in an integrated, mission-critical security solution. There is no
shortage of solutions available to minimise disruption if a server fails or if you have to recover
from a cyber-attack. Here is a jargon-busting overview of the best of them.
https://t.co/u7OYjiyqlH
6
© 2018 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Brexit: failure to update customs system could be 'catastrophic'
A failure to have a viable customs system in place to cope with Brexit when the UK quits the EU will
be catastrophic for business and the reputation of the country, the government has been told.
The influential parliamentary public accounts select committee said it was deeply worried that Her
Majesty’s Revenue and Customs did not yet have the funding from the government to develop
contingency plans for Brexit.
https://t.co/UlAZ2U9Yu1
Unsecured AWS server exposed classified military intel
Sensitive military data found on an unsecured Amazon server belonging to the U.S. Army
Intelligence and Security Command (INSCOM), a joint Intelligence effort with the National Security
Agency, was accessible to the public. It included information on project Red Disk, an Army cloud-
based intelligence platform, an auxiliary to the Distributed Common Ground System (Army DCGS-
A), that failed.
https://t.co/MuOjMVDyfI
Software maintenance at the root of CBP’s January outage
A Department of Homeland Security inspector general’s report examining a four-hour outage of the
Custom and Border Protection’s information technology system in January 2017 found that the
agency had insufficient software testing and maintenance. The problem ultimately had to be
corrected through legacy system servers, according to the report on the outage of CBP’s Advanced
Passenger Information System, which processes the ingress and egress of passengers to the U.S.,
utilizing information from the agency’s TECS databases. The nationwide system crash caused
significant flight delays, with the Office of the Inspector General reporting that 13,000 travelers were
hindered by the outage in Miami International Airport alone.
https://t.co/YwOBrO5to6
Cloud-to-cloud backup: What it is and why you need it
Applications that run in the cloud are protected but only so much. For full protection of data
generated by cloud-based apps, you need cloud-to-cloud backup. Spending on public cloud services
will reach US$236bn by 2020, according to Forrester. It’s a trend driven by increasing numbers
of applications being delivered from the cloud. Cloud computing is sometimes so easy that users
and IT teams assume it “just works,” and they are happy to leave data protection and backup to the
provider.
https://t.co/N3m6Fd7dqU
HP laptops found to have hidden keylogger
Hidden software that can record every letter typed on a computer keyboard has been discovered
pre-installed on hundreds of HP laptop models. Security researcher Michael Myng found the
keylogging code in software drivers preinstalled on HP laptops to make the keyboard work. HP said
more than 460 models of laptop were affected by the "potential security vulnerability." It has issued a
software patch for its customers to remove the keylogger. The issue affects laptops in the EliteBook,
ProBook, Pavilion and Envy ranges, among others. HP has issued a full list of affected devices,
dating back to 2012.
7
© 2018 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

https://t.co/Bx0VEHCvsr
Here’s What We Know About Google’s Chromebook Internet Outage
Around 2:30 p.m. on Tuesday, December 5th, Adam Henderson began receiving from across his
district’s 17 schools a flood of reports saying that Chromebook devices were no longer working.
Henderson, who is the Director of Technology Systems at Nassau County Schools in Florida, was
among the many educators who experienced the issue, which caused Chromebook devices to
logout of existing Internet accounts and fail to reconnect. In Nassau County, 5,000 devices
experienced the outage; but it’s expected that tens of thousands and perhaps millions of devices
around the country could have experienced the same glitch.
https://t.co/16Vvf7XTMs
Computer outage at hospitals, health centres caused by hardware, software failures
In early December, a computer outage that forced staff at hospitals and health-care centres across
the New Brunswick (Canadian province) to cancel services and turn patients away was blamed on
hardware and software failures in the data storage system. About 140 computer systems at Horizon
and Vitalité health authorities were unavailable during the outage, including provincial systems such
as the drug information database and regional systems such as patient scheduling and oncology
treatment systems.
https://t.co/hnzhpkeOGN
Bitcoin mining company says it was hacked, possible theft worth millions
A bitcoin mining company in Slovenia said in December that it had been hacked for the possible
theft of tens of millions of dollars. As the price of the virtual currency soared past $17,000, NiceHash,
a company that mines bitcoins on behalf of customers, said it is investigating a security breach that
may have resulted in the theft of about $70 million worth of bitcoin.
https://t.co/ekZ6HO3MsR
North Carolina County Refuses to Pay $23,000 Ransom to Hackers
In a world rocked by hackers, trolls and online evildoers of all stripes, the good people of the Internet
have long looked for a hero who would refuse to back down. Finally, someone has said enough is
enough. And that someone is the government of Mecklenburg County, North Carolina (U.S. State).
Mecklenburg is the most populous county in North Carolina, and the attack compromised many of its
systems. But after the ransomware attack, it said it was “open for business, albeit somewhat slower
with limited access to systems.”
https://t.co/tTkRw6Q2uP
New global Internet reliability concerns emerge
Undersea, Internet-carrying cables are not protected well enough; and there isn’t an alternative in
place should they fail. That's according to a new report from U.K.-based Policy Exchange, which
outlines potential catastrophic effects that a simple cut in the hosepipe-sized underwater
infrastructure could create.
https://t.co/SNW1aVqTjW
8
© 2018 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Stratus unveils edge computing strategy
With more than 90 percent of industrial companies wanting a simplified edge infrastructure that can
be remotely managed, Stratus Technologies, a global leader in continuous availability solutions for
mission-critical applications, recently unveiled its edge computing product strategy. This strategy
includes the latest version of Stratus’ flagship product, ftServer, along with a preview of a converged
edge system, which offers enhanced remote management services in a rugged and easy-to-deploy
form factor.
https://t.co/BhiR0MRv4d
Here’s How the Army Plans to Survive Space Attacks
U.S. military equipment relies heavily on satellites for GPS, but the Army is working on backup plans
in case a space attack disables GPS service. The Pentagon is not only working to reintroduce paper
maps, but it is also preparing for an impact that moves far beyond interrupted navigation. For
example, disrupted GPS and satellite communications will threaten the operation of drones and
munitions such as the Joint Direct Attack Munition (JDAM), which is in part guided by satellite.
https://t.co/gNXjMiQlKR
NASA fixes Voyager 1 deep space probe by firing thrusters not used in 37 years
Voyager 1 was launched in September 1977 and is the only human-made object in interstellar space
- the environment between the stars. But after four decades of exploration that have taken in fly-bys
of Jupiter and Saturn, engineers found that the primary thrusters orienting the space probe had
severely degraded. In an attempt to keep Voyager 1 operable, NASA tested four thrusters on the
back side of the spacecraft, thrusters that have not been used 1980. After waiting more than 19-and-
a-half hours for test results to travel through space, engineers found the dormant thrusters had
worked "perfectly." NASA now plans to use the trajectory correction maneuver thrusters permanently
- giving Voyager 1 an extra two to three years of life.
https://t.co/OPLGKLRSoD
Tesla mega-battery in Australia activated
The world's largest lithium ion battery has begun dispensing power into an electricity grid in South
Australia, which has been crippled by electricity problems in recent times. Tesla boss Elon Musk
famously vowed to build the battery within 100 days - a promise that was fulfilled. Located near
Jamestown, about 200km (125 miles) north of Adelaide, the battery is connected to a wind farm run
by French energy company Neoen.
https://t.co/NFveXw3e2L
9
© 2018 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

