Northern Virginia’s 911 Service Down for Four Days
December2012
Late in the evening of Friday, June 29, 2012, a quick and violent derecho storm swept through Northern
Virginia in the U.S., leaving millions of customers without power. Landline and wireless phone services
were cut. Disastrously, the storm left 2.3 million residents in Northern Virginia without access to 911
emergencyservices.911serviceswerenotfullyrestoreduntilfourdayslater,onJuly3rd.
The most likely time for a 911 system failure is during a disaster. The most likely time that 911 services
will be needed is during a disaster. This puts a specially important onus on the reliability of 911 systems
and their ability to survive natural and manmade disasters. Equally important is the disaster response
plan to provide emergency services should a 911 system fail. The public has to feel comfortable that it
cangetemergencyaid,nomatterwhat.
The U.S. 911 Emergency Call Centers
If emergency services are required in the U.S., they can be accessed from anywhere in the country by
simply dialing 9-1-1. (Many other countries have a similar service using 9-9-9 or other numbers.)
Providing the call is being made from a land line, the 911 system knows the location of the caller and
routes the call to an appropriate 911 jurisdiction along with the location information. A 911 operator can
thendispatchwhateveraidisrequiredtothecallinglocation.
If technicalproblems preventacallfrom beingroutedtotheappropriatejurisdiction,thecallis reroutedto
a neighboring jurisdiction. The intent is to route a call to a 911 operator somewhere no matter what
networkproblemsmightbeencountered.
WorkisnowunderwaytoextendlocationidentificationtomobilephonesviaGPStracking.
The 911 function is so critical that it is a criminal offense in many states to make non-emergency calls
using911.
What’s a Derecho?
AccordingtoNOAA’sStormPredictionCenter,aderecho(deh-REY-cho)isarare,widespread,long-lived
wind storm that is associated with a band of rapidly moving thunderstorms. In order to qualify as a
derecho,thestormmustextendmorethan240milesandhavewindgustsupto58milesperhour.
The derecho that hit Northern Virginia on June 29th originated in Illinois and carried wind gusts up to 90
mph.
1
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

The Derecho Hits
The derecho hit Northern Virginia at 10:30 PM in the evening of June 29th. Residents saw the bad
weather coming in on television, but no one expected the ferocity of the winds associated with the storm.
Thespeedwithwhichthestormmovedanditswindvelocitywereunprecedented.
911 call centers were immediately swamped with calls of downed wires and trees, felled poles, and roof
damage. The emergency calls reached a level over five times the normal volume. Police took over
manualtrafficcontrolatintersectionsthathadlosttheirsignals.Firecrewswentonrescuecalls.
Ittookthreehoursforthederechotopassthrough,whichitdidat1:30AM,June30th.
The 911 Failure
At 4 AM, officials shut down the storm’s response center since the volume of calls had significantly
decreased. They braced for an expected fresh wave of emergency calls when residents woke up and
realizedthefullextentofthedamagetotheirproperties.
But eerily, no calls came. Verizon had not notified emergency officials of any problems in its 911 network
exceptfor acryptic messageat6:30AMsayingthat there wereproblems atits Arlingtoncommunications
center.Therewasnoreferencetoanyimpacton911servicesasaresultoftheseproblems.
It now became apparent that not only were the emergency lines out, but nonemergency lines,
administrativelines,andcell-phoneservice weredead as well. Allof thealternate 911centers inthearea
weredown.Thefewemergencycallsthatdidgetthroughhadnolocationinformation.
It took another three hours for Verizon to admit that they did indeed have communication problems
affecting the entire area’s 911 services. In fact, Verizon know this nine hours earlier, but for some reason
decidednottocommunicatetheproblem.
The Efforts to Respond
At this point, callers with medical and other emergencies received either busy signals, recorded
messagessayingthelinewasinoperative,orsimplydeadsilence.
Local officials made extraordinaryefforts to alert residents that the 911 system was down. They informed
residents byradio,television,Websites,Facebook,Twitter, and neighborhood emaillists tocall alternate
nonemergency phone numbers or to send emails. If that didn’t work, residents were told to go to the
nearest police or fire station for help. Staffing was increased at these facilities to handle the expected
floodofwalk-ins.Interestingly,therewaslittleofthis.
The Failure of Verizon’s Arlington Central Office
Verizonlaterexplainedtheoutagewiththefollowingdescription:
“External power failures affected more than 100 Verizon locations. At each of these locations,
batteries and nearly all the backup generators worked as designed, allowing us to continue service.
However, attwo of these locations, generators failedtostart, disabling hundreds of network transport
systems,andcausingVerizontolosemuchofitsvisibilityintoitsnetworksintheimpactedarea.”
Two generators failed to start and the entire 911 network in Northern Virginia went down? Clearly, there
hadtobemoretothestorythanthis!
2
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

It turned out that the two facilities taken down by generator faults were Verizon’s Fairfax and Arlington
offices. At Fairfax, the generator’s auto-start mechanism failed. The Fairfax failure had no far-reaching
effects.
Arlingtonwasadifferentstory.Asubsequentinvestigationshowedthatairhadgottenintothegenerator’s
fuellines.Fuelcouldnotbe pumpedtothegenerators,sotheycouldnotrun.Arlingtoncontinuedrunning
forfivehoursonbatteries,butitcloseddownat5AMthemorningofJune30th.
Arlington is a Verizon major communications backbone for the Northern Virginia area and is responsible
for funneling emergency 911 calls to the proper jurisdictions. With Arlington down, no emergency calls
couldberouted,andthe911systemwentdead.
Compounding the problem, Arlington’s failure disabled Verizon’s network monitoring capabilities. No
longer didithavevisibilityintoits network tolocalizeproblems suchas brokenwires duetofallentrees.It
wasimpossibleforVerizontoassessdamagesandmakerepairs.
Thisiswhyittookfourdaystocompletelyrestore911servicestothearea.
Lessons Learned
This is notthefirstfailureof 911services intheNorthernVirginia area.Ithas hadelevensuchoutages in
the preceding two year period, including faults due to blizzards in January 2010 and 2011 and to
HurricaneIrene.
This widespread 911 failure elicited strong responses from officials and politicians, all the way to
Congress. The U.S. Federal Communications Commission, the Virginia State Corporation (the state’s
regulatorybody),andtheVirginiagovernor’sofficealllaunchedinvestigations.
Severalrecommendationscameoutoftheseinvestigations,andVerizonisimplementingthemall:
1. Verizon is signing on to the National Incident Management System (NIMS) model to assess
future incidents (used in the United States to coordinate emergency preparedness and incident
managementamongvariousfederal,state,andlocalagencies)
2. It is implementing a reverse notification phone-call system to give notice about a 911 failure.
Verizonwillextenditscurrentemailnotificationsystemtotextingandwillestablishcorrectcontact
lists.
3. Itwilldevelopasemiannualdrillwitheachjurisdictiononactionstobetakenintheeventofa911
outage.
4. It will provide monthly a current contact list for each jurisdiction, including escalations up to the
vicepresidentiallevel
5. It will have a representative present at each jurisdiction’s Emergency Operations Center to
provideaccurateinformationon911servicesandoutages.
6. Itisimprovinggeneratormaintenance,reliability,andredundancy.
In addition, the State of Virginia is assembling an interjurisdictional 850 MHz talk group for 911 events.
This radiofacilityis designedto not interferewith policeor firemutualaidradiosystems.Itwill providean
independentcommunicationspathfor911operations.
3
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

It is clear that these actions will not prevent future 911 outages. However, they will improve the response
tooutagestominimizetheireffectsonthepopulace.
Acknowledgements
Thematerialforthisarticlewastakenfromthefollowingresources:
When911Fails:WhatSafeguardsAreInPlace?,EmergencyManagement;November25,2012.
Afterstorm,911,phoneserviceremainsspotty,WashingtonPost;July2,2012.
NoDeathsRelatedto911“TotalFailure,”NBC;July2,2012.
911failureaffected2.3millioninNorthernVirginia,WashingtonPost;July11,2012.
LessonsLearnedfromDerecho911Problems,ARLnow;August20,2012.
Virginiainvestigates911phonesystemfailure,WTOP;September11,2012.
ReportcriticizesVerizonresponseto911failure,WTOP;November14,2012.
911SystemHasFailedMultipleTimesinMaryland,Virginia,WAMU;December3,2012.
4
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com