 It can send the missing message directly to the requesting receiver over a point-to-point
connection between it and that receiver. This requires that the sender maintain a
permanent or transient connection to each receiver. However, this technique precludes
theuseofnegativeacknowledgemulticastsasdescribedabovesinceonlytherequesting
receiverwillreceivethemissingmessage.
 The missing message can be multicast to all receivers. Receivers can determine if this
message is a duplicate of a previously-received message based on the message
sequence number, and they can discard duplicate messages. Though processing
duplicate messages is an increased overhead for the receivers, this overhead is
generallyverysmall.
 Themulticaststream canberestartedatthepointofthemissingmessage.Receivers will
discard duplicate messages. This technique is useful on noisy channels that are not
heavilyloaded.
Reliable Multicasting over Wide Area Networks
Multicasting over wide-area networks (WANs) differs from that over LANs because there is
typicallynowayforasendertomulticastasinglemessageoveraWANwithoutsomespecialized
infrastructure.Therefore,acustomWANmulticastnetworkmustbeconfigured.Suchanetworkis
often organized as a tree in which a message sent by a sender propagates down the tree to its
receivers.
TheMulticastTree
A multicast tree is a typical tree structure with a root node and several child nodes. Each node in
the tree can serve its own receivers and can also serve as a parent to its child nodes. Each
parentcanhaveseveralchildnodes.Eachchildnodehasasingleparentnode.
4
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

The network serving a node and its children can be either a WAN or a LAN. If the children are
distant from the node, a WAN network must be used. However, if the children are local, then the
parent node can multicast to its children as described previously for reliable multicasting over a
LAN.
NodeBuffering
One problem with WAN multicasting is that the links
sender
in the tree can have very large communication
latencies, often extending into the tens or hundreds
ofmilliseconds.Therefore,itcantakenotonlyalong
root
time for a message to propagate from the sender to
node
a receiver, but it also can take a long time for the
receiver to receive the retransmission of a lost nak
message. rcvr rcvr
child child
To alleviate this problem, the nodes in the tree can rcvr rcvr
node node
buffer recent messages. Then, if a receiver detects
rcvr rcvr
that it has missed a message, it need only ask its
parentforaretransmissionofthatmessage.
WANReliable nak rcvr
This technique also serves to reduce the
Multicast
retransmissionloadonthesender. child rcvr
node
DistributedDatabases rcvr
As mentioned earlier, one application for multicasting is to support distributed databases. As
opposed to events that are multicast, distributed databases must be persistent. However,
databasecopiesdonothavetobecomplete.
This is not true of application databases used in active/active application networks as each
database copy has to reflect the current state of the application. However, this completeness
requirement can be relaxed for information distribution databases as might be used to distribute
stockquotesornewsitems.
Node buffering is very useful in these cases. To use node buffering to make information
distribution more efficient, an update is not propagated to a receiver unless the receiver has
requestedthatthisparticulardataitembemadeavailabletoit.
For instance, in a securities quotation service, each node may contain a partial database
containing the quotes for a certain set of securities. A node serves a set of brokers’ terminals.
When a broker requests of his node the price for a security, the node will send him the current
priceifithasitinitsdatabase,Ifitdoesnot,thenodeasksitsparentnodeforthedataitem.Ifthe
parent node does not have it, it asks its parent node and so on until the root node, which has the
completedatabase,isreached.
Each parent node is aware of the data items that are being monitored by each of its children.
Therefore, when an update for a data item is received by a node (which will receive it only if its
parent is aware that it is monitoring that data item), it will send the update to those of its children
nodesthatarealsomonitoringthatdataitem.Thus,anodewillalwaysmaintainthelateststateof
alldataitemsthatitiscurrentlymonitoring.
This organization has several advantages. First, except for the first query for a data item, all
queries are satisfied by the requester’s parent node. Queries do not have to travel across the
networktoamasterdatabasesomewheredistant.
5
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Another important advantage is bringing a node online. When a node joins the network, either
because it is new or because it is a recovered failed node, the node’s database does not have to
beinitialized.Rather,itisself-initializingoveraperiodoftimeasrequestsaremadeofit.
In addition, the database can be continually refreshed by sending its information as background
trafficoveranextendedperiodoftime(whichmighttakehours).Thisprovidestwofunctions:
 Itbringsincompletedatabasesup-to-dateevenintheabsenceofqueryactivity.
 Itcorrectsdatabaseerrorsthatmightoccurovertime.
DynamicTrees
LAN multicast groups can easily be dynamic as users join and leave the group. However,
dynamicmulticastingoveraWANisnotquitesosimple.
If a node that is not currently part of the multicast tree wants to join the tree, it must bind with
someothernodeasachildtothatnode.Buttowhichnodeshoulditbind?
Acommonsolutionisforthenewnodetocontacttherootnode(orsomeothermonitornode)and
requestthatitbeallowedtojointhetree.Themonitoringnodecanmakethedecisionastowhich
nodeshouldbethenewnode’sparentbasedononeormorecriteria:
 Stress:thecurrentloadonexistingnodesinthetree.
 Stretch: the ratio of the latency through the tree to the node as compared to the latency
directlytotherootnode(i.e.,theefficiencyofthepath).
 Cost:thetotalpathtimetoreachthenodethroughthetree.
Note, for instance, that connecting all nodes to the root in a star network minimizes the cost but
maximizesthestress.
From time to time, it may be desirable to rebalance the tree by redefining the parent-child nodal
relationships.
Node failure can be conveniently handled in a dynamic tree. Should a node fail, its children can
be connected to other nodes according to the tree balancing algorithm in use. The child nodes
will detect any messages that they had missed and will request retransmission once they are
rejoinedtothetree.
Multiple Senders
If multiple senders canmulticastmessages to the group, each simplymaintains its own message
sequence numbering. A receiver therefore can detect missing messages from any sender and
canrequesttransmissionfromthatsender.
An interesting example of this is the multicasting of negative acknowledgements over LAN
networks, as described above. In this case, any receiver can also be an occasional sender.
However, in this case, the data stream sender receiving the negative acknowledgement
messages will probably not request that a missed negative acknowledge message be
retransmitted. It will instead wait for the receiver to retransmit that negative acknowledge
message after the receiver has determined that it still has not received the retransmission of the
lost message. In this case, there is no reason for the receiver to even add sequence numbers to
itsnegativeacknowledgementmessages.
If the senders are all independent, there is no need to require total ordering of all messages.
Ordering of messages received from each sender according to sequence numbers is sufficient.
6
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

However, if two or more senders are causally dependent – that is, messages from one sender
depend upon the activities of another sender – then total ordering of messages between senders
mayberequired.Thisisaparticularlydifficultproblem Itcanbesolvedviavectortimestampsas
discussedintheTanenbaum/VanSteenreferencecitedpreviously.3
Summary
Reliable multicasting to several receivers is required in many applications in which events or
databases mustbedistributedacross anetwork.Reliablemulticastingrequires thatreceivers can
detect missing messages and can efficiently request their retransmission. Lost message
detectioniseasilyaccomplishedbymessagesequencenumbering.
However, the methods for distributing messages and message retransmissions to a group of
receivers is different for LANs and WANs. With LANs, IGMP protocol support exists for
multicasting. Retransmission requests can be via unicast to the sender or by multicast over the
multicastnetwork.Likewise,retransmissions can besent via unicasttotherequesting receiver or
toallreceiversoverthemulticastnetwork.
WAN multicasting can be implemented via trees overlaid on the network. Receivers obtain their
updates from nodes in the tree. Updates propagate down the tree on an as-needed basis. A
distributed informational database can be created over time as it processes requests or by
databaserefreshescarriedoutinthebackground.
3
A.S.Tanenbaum,M.VanSteen,Chapter6,Synchronization,DistributedSystems:PrinciplesandParadigms,Pearson
PrenticeHall;2007.
7
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

