The Smarts Behind EMV Smart Cards
Part 1 – Online Transaction Processing
YashKapadia,CEO,OmniPayments,Inc.
November2014
Target, the third largest retailer in the U.S., suffered a card-skimming attack during the
last months of 2013 in which hackers were able to obtain the magnetic-stripe data off of
cards used in Target stores. Stolen was the personal data from 110 million payment
cards.1Thousandsoffraudulenttransactionsfollowed.Isthereadefenseagainstthesedatabreaches?
The answer is yes – smart cards.2 A smart card, also called a chip card or an
integrated-circuit card (ICC), includes an embedded computer chip that employs
cryptographic and risk-management features. In conjunction with a smart-card POS or
ATM terminal, these features are designed to thwart skimming, card-cloning, card-
counterfeiting,andotherfraudulentattacks.
It is important that the payment community understand smart-card technology, which is becoming an
important component in all financial networks. In this article, split over two issues of The Connection, we
describe how smart cards add significant security to payment card transactions. Part 1 covers the
methods for authorizing smart-card transactions online with the issuer. In Part 2, we will discuss the
proceduresforsecurelyauthorizingsmart-cardtransactionsofflinewithoutdirectissuerinvolvement.
The Worldwide Adoption of EMV Smart Cards
A decade or more ago, a consortium of card issuers comprising Europay, MasterCard, and Visa (EMV)
began the specification of smart cards or as they are formally known today, EMV cards. EMV card
technology has been adopted by most of the countries on all continents in the world. Excluding the U.S.,
therenowexist2.3billionEMVcardsand37millionEMVterminalsworldwide.
The operative term is “excluding the U.S.” The United States is the laggard. Representing almost half of
all payment cards and terminals in the world, the U.S. still runs its payment-card services on outdated
magnetic-stripe technology. However, this is about to change. The U.S. payment-card industry has
mandated that all merchants be EMV-compatible by October, 2015 (except for gas stations, which have
until2017)orfacea“liabilityshift.”Ifamerchantdoesnotprocessatleast75%ofitstransactionsthrough
an EMV-enabled POS terminal (whether via chip cards or magnetic-stripe cards) and accepts a disputed
orfraudulentcardpayment,themerchantwillbeliableforthetransactionratherthantheissuer.
The U.S. is well on its way to EMV acceptance. As of the end of 2013, all acquiring banks and issuing
banks were ready and were helping merchants move to EMV technology. Payment-card issuers have
1TargetCompromisesMillionsofPaymentCards,AvailabilityDigest;January2014.
2ThisarticlewasfirstpublishedintheSeptember/OctoberissueofTheConnection.
1

distributed 20 million EMV cards and are expected to issue 100 million such cards by the end of 2014.
ATMprovidersareactivelydeployingEMV-enabledATMs.
Already, several major retailers are EMV-ready, including Home Depot, Walmart, Best Buy, and Sam’s
Club.
The Structure of an EMV Card
An EMV card looks like a normal magnetic-stripe card, but in it is embedded a small but powerful
microprocessorchipwithexposedterminals.
The chip includes a processor, an encryption engine, and the capability to store data. During a card
transaction,dataflowsinbothdirectionsbetweenthecardandtheEMVPOSterminalaswellasbetween
the card and the issuer. All data transfers are encrypted. However, no personal information is stored on
the card other than that stored in a magnetic stripe – the Primary Account Number (PAN), the
cardholder’sname,andthecard’seffectiveandexpirationdates.
The data stored on the card comprises public data that can be accessed by the EMV POS terminal and
secret data such as encryption keys that cannot be accessed. If any attempt is made to access secret
data,thedataiserased;andthecardisrenderedunusable.
Via the exposed contacts on the card’s chip, data can be transferred between the POS terminal and the
cardbyinsertingthecardintoanEMVterminal.Contactlessandmobiletransfersarealsosupported.
2

TerminalCapabilities
EMV terminal capabilities are described by a three-byte, bit-encoded designator. These capabilities
include:
Byte1:CardData Byte2:Cardholder Byte3:Security
InputCapability VerificationMethod(CVM) Capability
Manualkeyentry PlaintextPINforICC SDA
verification
Magneticstripe DDA
EncipheredPINforonline
IC(integratedcircuit) CDA
verification
withcontacts
(These capabilities are
Signature(paper)
describedlater inPart2
EncipheredPINforoffline ofthisarticle.)
verification
NoCVMrequired
Table1:EMVPOSTerminalCapabilities
Encryption
EMV supports two types of encryption, depending upon whether the card is communicating with the
issuerorwiththeterminal.
Card/IssuerCommunication
Messages sent from the card to the issuer through the POS terminal are encrypted via Triple DES
symmetrickeyencryption.Withsymmetrickeyencryption,asecretkeyissharedbetweeneachpartnerin
the communication. The sender encrypts the message with the common key, and the recipient decrypts
themessagewiththesamekey.
However, to preclude an attacker from obtaining thousands of messages all
encryptedwiththesamekey, whichmaygivehim theabilitytodeducethekey,each
card has a separate key. The keythat the card uses is derived from the issuer’s key
and the card account number. Communications from the card to the issuer are
encrypted with the card’s key. Using its own secret key, the issuer can deduce the
card’s key and decrypt the message. Messages that it returns to the card are encrypted with the card’s
key.
Though these messages pass through the POS terminal, the POS terminal cannot read these messages
becauseitdoesnothavethesymmetricencryptionkeyusedtoencryptthemessage.
Card/TerminalCommunication
Symmetric key encryption is not suitable for communication between the card and the
POS or ATM terminal. The card would have to know the Triple DES key for every
terminal in the world. Rather, public-key cryptography is used for card/terminal
communications.
With this technique, a pair of keys is created. One key is a public key, and the other is
a private key. The public key for a card can be made available to any POS terminal
with which it needs to communicate. Messages encrypted with one key can only be
3

decryptedwiththeotherkey.
For instance, a sender of a message can encrypt the message with the sender’s private key, and the
recipient can decrypt the message with the sender’s public key. In this way, the recipient knows that the
message has come from the sender (the sender has signed the message). Alternatively, the sender can
encrypt the message with the recipient’s public key, and the recipient can decrypt the message with its
private key. In this way, the sender is confident that only the recipient will be able to read the message.
By using double encryption with both keys, the recipient knows with certainty who the sender is; and the
senderknowswithcertaintythatonlytherecipientcanreaditsmessage.
All public keys are registered with a trusted central Certificate Authority so that they can be verified as
validbeforeusingthemtoencryptordecryptmessagestoorfromanotherdevice.
The EMV card uses public-key encryption to communicate with the POS terminal. The card has its own
publicandprivatekeysandallowstheterminaltoreadandauthenticatethecard’spublickeys.
CardData
Thecardstoresthreekindsofdata–staticdata,dynamicdata,andsecretdata.
StaticData
AnEMVcardstoresoverfive-dozenstaticdataobjectsavailabletotheEMVterminal.Thesedataobjects
are static in that they are loaded onto the card by the issuer when the card is first created. Static data
includes the following, the use for which will be described later in the article (unless already described
above):
-theprimaryaccountnumber -cardpublickey
-thecardholder’sname -PINpublickey
-thecard’seffectivedate -publickeyCertificateAuthority
-thecard’sexpirationdate -applicationID(s)andname(s)(AID)
-thecardholder’slanguagepreference -CardholderVerificationMethod(CVM)
-issueridentification -signedStaticApplicationData(SDA)
-issuerpublickey -IssuerActionCodes(IAC)
Table2:EMVCardStaticData
DynamicData
Dynamic data is data that can be modified by card action or by issuer action. Modifications by the issuer
aregenerallychanges to therisk parameters usedbythecard to determine its response to atransaction.
Dynamicdataincludes:
-transactioncounter -lowerofflinefloorlimit
-offlinetransactioncounter -upperofflinefloorlimit
-maximumofflinetransactions
Table3:EMVCardDynamicData
SecretData
Secret data is not available to any external entity. Any attempt to access this data causes the data to be
erasedandthecardrenderedunusableSecretdataincludes:
4
