Stock Exchange Speeds Clearing with Data Replication
June2014
PaulJ.Holenstein
ExecutiveVicePresident
Gravic,Inc.
A regional South American stock exchange realized that it could not reliably achieve
same-daysecuritiessettlement-commitmenttimesduetothemanualreportingoftrades
to its clearinghouse and the often ensuing data-entry errors. It decided to re-architect its interaction with
the clearinghouse to make the process fully automatic. This enhancement eliminated erroneous manual
inputandenabledtheexchangetoimproveitssettlementtimes.
The re-architected system required heterogeneous data replication between the exchange’s HP NonStop
trading system and its clearinghouse’s AIX/Sybase system. Data replication now plays a major role in
integrating themanyheterogeneous systems inthe exchange’s new IT infrastructureas well as providing
continuousavailabilityforitsmission-criticalbusinessservices.
The Stock Exchange
The stock exchange is the result of the 2001 merger of three of the country’s regional stock exchanges,
one of which dates back to the late 1920s. The exchange operates a trading platform for equities, fixed
income bonds, and standardized derivatives using an HP NonStop server pair in an active/standby
configuration for the purpose of disaster recovery. In addition to its trading functions, the exchange
provides equities and fixed income clearing and settlement services, market data, and electronic access
to accounts. The exchange lists 89 corporations with a combined market capitalization of USD $200
billion.
The Clearinghouse
To provide clearing and settlement services, the exchange partners with a clearinghouse that acts as a
security depository. A security depository maintains all of the stocks and bonds of its account holders
electronically so that ownership can be transferred easily via a book entry rather than via a physical
transfer of certificates. The clearinghouse provides the clearing and settlement functions per the
settlementcyclesmandatedinthesettlementagreements.
At the end of the trading day, the clearinghouse determines which members are due to deliver funds or
securitiesandwhichmembersareduetoreceivefundsorsecuritiesbythesettlementdate.Eachtradeis
assigned to a buyer and a seller, and any funds and securities being transferred between them must
match. Settlement is a two-way process that involves the transfer of funds and securities on the
settlementdatebetweenthetradingparties.
The clearinghouse does not transfer paper stock certificates or bonds, though paper records of account
holders’assetsareprepared.Rather,therecordofsecuritiesbeingheldbyaccountholdersismaintained
1
©2014SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

in the clearinghouse’s Security Depository database. Because there is no need to physically transfer
physicalsecurities,theclearingandsettlementprocesscanbeveryfast.
Straight-Through Processing (STP)
Itis normalfor settlementschedules tobemeasuredindays (typicallythreebusiness days,or trade-plus-
three, “T+3”) since the clearing and settlement process can be highly manual and very complex. It is the
exchange’s goal to achieve Straight-Through Processing (STP), or “T+0,” in which settlement can be
accomplished on the same day as the trade (or on the next day at worst). Achieving this goal requires
thattheentireclearingandsettlementprocessbeautomatedandbehighlyaccurateandreliable.
The clearinghouse used by the exchange is able to meet this criterion. All securities are maintained
electronically so that trades can be matched and assigned to buyers and sellers with no manual
intervention. A trade is rejected for manual reconciliation only if there is a mismatch. For instance, Trader
A says that he sold 100 shares of IBM to Trader B, but Trader B says that he bought 200 shares of IBM
fromTraderA.
A key challenge that the exchange faced in attempting to achieve T+0 was that the entry of trade
informationintotheclearinghouse’ssystem wasanerror-prone,manualdata-inputprocessthathadtobe
done by the trader. The result, a high rate of trade-reporting errors, led to many trade rejects requiring
manualreconciliationas wellastomultipleSTPsettlementviolations,inwhichtradescouldnotbesettled
onthesameornextday.
In order to correct this problem, the exchange and the clearinghouse cooperated to facilitate the
electronic entry of trades from the exchange’s trading system into the clearinghouse system. Ever since
thissolutionwasimplemented,theexchangehasofferedSTPtoitstraders.
The Original System
The original method for trade entry, reconciliation, and clearing is shown in Figure 1. The exchange’s
tradingsystem isbuiltuponapairofHPNonStopserversystemsconfiguredasanactive/standbypairfor
disaster recovery. The trading system’s databases use HP NonStop Enscribe and HP NonStop SQL/MP.
The primary system is a four-CPU NS2100 HP NonStop server, and the standby system is a two-CPU
NS2100HPNonStopserver.
The exchange’s trading application is active in the primary node of its trading system, and the primary
node’s databases are replicated in real time to the standby node’s databases in an active/passive,
disaster-recovery architecture. The standby node is thus ready to take over the trading function should
theprimarynodefail.Todoso,itmustbringupthetradingapplication,mountthe tradingdatabases,and
switchoverthetraderstothenewprimarysystem.
Traders (the broker/dealers) enter buy/sell orders via their trading terminals. The orders are stored in the
exchange’s Order Database as they await execution. As the exchange’s trading application executes
orders, the trade details are stored in the exchange’s Trade Database. The trade details are returned to
theoriginatingtradersasatradeconfirmation.
The clearinghouse maintains the security depository, which is the record of ownership for all securities
managed by the clearinghouse. At the end of the day, trading activity is reconciled by the clearing
application,andthesecuritydepositoryisupdatedtoreflectthenewsecurityownerships.
2
©2014SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Figure1–TheOriginalTradingandClearingSystem
Theprocedureusedtotradeandclearwiththissystemwasoriginallyimplementedasfollows:
 Abroker/dealerenteredanorderathistradingterminalandsubmittedittotheexchange(1).
 Allpendingorderswerestoredintheexchange’sOrderDatabase.
 When the exchange’s trading application executed an order, the result of the trade (successful or
not, the price, the broker/dealer on the other side of the trade, etc.) was stored in the exchange’s
TradeDatabase.
 Thetradedetailswerereturnedtothebroker/dealeranddisplayedonhistradingterminal(2).
 The broker/dealer then had to manually enter the trade results into a Trade Database resident in
theclearinghouse’ssystem(3).
 At the end of the day, the exchange’s trading system transferred its record of the day’s trading
activitytotheclearinghouse’sclearingapplication(4).
Unfortunately, step (3) proved to be time-consuming and highly subject to data-entry errors. Typically, a
trader was very busy intensivelymanaging multiple trades, and his primaryfocus was not on this manual
intrusionintohisprimarytradingactivity.
At the end of the day, the clearing application attempted to match each trade that it received from the
exchange to the trades accumulated during the day from the broker/dealers. Inevitably, there was a high
error rate, as many trades did not match due to the data-entry errors. These trades had to be rejected
and then manually reconciled. The time that it took to perform these manual trade submissions and
eventual reconciliations for mismatched trades added overhead and extra cost and prevented the
exchangefrommeetingmanyofitsSTPcommitments.
Enhancing Clearing with Data Replication
To correct this problem so that STP could be achieved, the exchange and the clearinghouse cooperated
toeliminatethemanualre-entryoftraderesultsbythebroker/dealers,therebyallowingelectronic entryof
trades from the exchange’s systems directly into the clearinghouse system. The modifications to the
originalsystemtoachievethisenhancementarereflectedinFigure2.
3
©2014SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

The first step was to add the clearinghouse’s Validation Database to the exchange’s trade-entry
verification sequence. This database contains all of the consistent and correct values for trade
parameters,includingsecurityCUSIPnumbers,symbols,andvalidbrokerIDsandnames.Updatestothe
database are entered by the clearinghouse, and the Validation Database is replicated to the exchange’s
trading system in real time in order to keep the two synchronized. The exchange’s trading system uses
the ValidationDatabaseto ensurethatorders entered bythebroker/dealers are accuratelyformattedand
that they contain standardized parameters. Thus, all orders and their subsequent trades are guaranteed
tobeconsistentandacceptabletothesystemapplications.
One issue that needed to be resolved was that the clearinghouse’s Validation Database was a Sybase
database stored on an IBM AIX system, whereas the exchange’s copy of that database was an HP
NonStop SQL/MP database stored on an HP NonStop server. Replication between the two therefore
required a data replication engine that supported heterogeneous replication. The exchange chose the
Shadowbase replication engine from Gravic, Inc. (www.gravic.com/shadowbase), which supports a wide
varietyofsourceandtargetsystemsanddatabases.
Figure2–EnhancedTradeReportingSystem
WithreferencetoFigure2,thetradingprocedureisnowasfollows:
 Updates to the clearinghouse’s Sybase Validation Database are entered by the clearinghouse
(1).
 These updates are replicated in real-time to the exchange’s HP NonStop SQL/MP Validation
Database(2).
 Abroker/dealersubmitsanordertotheexchange’stradingsystem(3).
 Theorderparametersareverifiedagainsttheexchange’sValidationDatabase.
4
©2014SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

 Ifthereisaparametererror,theorderisrejected.
 Iftheorderisformattedproperly,itisplacedintotheexchange’sOrderDatabase.
 The exchange executes orders in the Order Database as soon as it is able, based on the order
