The Cost of RPO and RTO
September2012
The purpose of availability analysis is to determine how to limit downtime and data loss. Both cost a
corporation money and reputation. But improving them also costs money. Improvement generally means
adding redundancyto the corporate systems. How does one balance the cost of availability improvement
againstthesavingsofreduceddowntimeandlostdata?
For every application, the company should set certain objectives for lost downtime and lost data. The
objective for lost downtime is called the Recovery Time Objective, or RTO. The objective for lost data is
calledtheRecoveryPointObjective,orRPO.
The techniques for minimizing downtime and lost data are, in general, largely independent. Redundancy
is used to minimize downtime. Data replication is use to minimize lost data. Downtime is minimized by
providing geographically dispersed redundant servers and storage. The faster the failover, the lower is
RTO. Lost data is minimized by maintaining a copy of the data at a safe site. The shorter the replication
latency (that is, the time from when a change is made to the production database to the time that it is
madetothebackupdatabase),thelowerisRPO.
In this article, we look at relationships between costs and savings; and we generate some rules of thumb
forarrivingatthebestcompromise.TheanalysisisthesameforbothRPOandRTO.Therefore,wefocus
onRPOasanexample.
Recovery Point Objective (RPO)
RPOArchitectures
Data can be protected against loss via many techniques, each with their own RPO and cost
characteristics:
 Theclassicmethodismagnetictape.Alldatafrom thelastfullorincrementalbackupislost.RPO
canbemeasuredindays.
1
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

 Virtualtape writes magnetic tapeimages todisk insteadof tape. This is muchfaster,sobackups
canbetakenmorefrequently.RPOistypicallymeasuredinhours.
 Data changes can be replicated to a backup SAN by the SAN system. RPO is generally
measuredinminutes.
 Asynchronous replication replicates changes after they are made to the production database to a
backupdatabase.RPOistypicallyintheorderofseconds.
 Synchronous replication ensures that a change is made on the backup database before the
productiondatabasechangecompletes.RPOiszerointhiscase.
TheRPO/CostRelationship
The cost of lost data goes down as RPO approaches zero. The cost of the system goes up as RPO
approaches zero. By plotting these two cost curves and adding them, the total cost for anyRPO solution
can be estimated. The task is then to determine the least-cost solution. This will define the ideal RPO
fromacostbasis.
LetusconsidersomecasesofRPOcosts.
Example1:LinearCosts
IdenticalLinearCosts
If the system cost increases linearly with RPO and the cost of lost
datadecreaseswithRPOatthesamerate,thetotalcostisconstant.
Itdoesnotmatterwhichsolutionis adoptedfrom acostviewpoint.In
thiscase,choosethesolutionthatminimizesRPO.
DifferentLinearCosts
It the costs are linear but change at different rates, the cost that changes fastest wins. If the cost of lost
data decreases at a faster rate than the system cost escalates, choose the minimum RPO. If the cost of
thesystemincreasesfasterthanthecostoflostdatadecreases,choosethemaximumRPO.
total total
data system
loss complexity
cost cost data
system
loss
complexity
RPO better RPO better
Datalosscostchangesfaster Systemcostchangesfaster
Example2:DifferentLinearCosts
Example2:Exponentialcosts
Wenow look at a more difficult case, but one that is more representative of the real world. The costs are
not linear, but always change in the same direction. The cost of lost data always decreases as RPO
approaches zero, and the cost of the system always increases as RPO approaches zero. We get into
someheaviermathematicshere,buttheconclusionsaremeaningful.
2
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

We assume that the minimum cost is somewhere between zero RPO and maximum RPO. Then the
minimum cost is the point at which the slope of the cost curve is zero. This means that the derivative of
thetotalcostwithrespecttoRPOiszero(rememberyourcalculus?):
d(totalcost)/dRPO=d(datacost+systemcost)/dRPO=0
d(datacost)/dRPO=-d(systemcost)/dRPO
The slope of the data cost curve is positive (the cost of lost data increases with increasing RPO). The
slope of the system cost curve is negative (the cost of the system decreases with increasing RPO).
Therefore, the minimum cost point is that RPO at which the slopes of the data cost and system cost are
equal.
Rule1:TheminimumcostpointisthatRPOatwhichtheslopesofthedatacostandthesystemcostare
equal.
ExponentialfunctionswithcostofdatalossincreasingmorerapidlythanRPOincreases
Let us now take the case of exponentially changing data loss cost and system cost in which the cost of
lost data increases more rapidly than RPO increases. The cost
curvescanberepresentedas
Costoflostdata=d(eaRPO-1)
Costofsystem =s(e-bRPO)
Then,thetotalcostis
Totalcost=C=d(eaRPO-1)+s(e-bRPO)
Wetakethederivativeofthetotalcostandsetittozerotofind
theRPOcorrespondingtozeroslope:
dC/dRPO=ad(eaRPO)–bs(e-bRPO)=0
eaRPO/e-bRPO=bs/ad
e(b+a)RPO=bs/ad
Takingthenaturallogarithmofbothsides
(b+a)RPO=ln(bs/ad)
Thus:
minimumRPO=ln(bs/ad)/(b+a)
Thisresulthasaninterestinginterpretation.Notethatbsmustbegreaterthanad.Otherwise,ln(bs/ad) is
negativeandtheminimumRPOisnegative.Ifbs<ad,thecostofthelostdataisdecreasingfasterthan
thecostofthesystemisincreasingasRPOapproacheszero.Therefore,theminimumcostpointisat
RPO=0.Ifbs>ad,thecostoflostdataisdecreasingslowerthanthecostofthesystemisincreasingas
RP0approacheszero.Therefore,therewillbesomeRPOatwhichthetotalcostisminimum.
3
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

bs>ad bs<ad
Systemcostincreasingrapidly Datacostincreasingrapidly
35.000 35.000
30.000 30.000
25.000 25.000
20.000 20.000
15.000 15.000
10.000 10.000
5.000 5.000
0.000 0.000
2.0 1.5 1.0 .5 0 2.0 1.5 1.0 .5 0
ImprovingRPO--> ImprovingRPO-->
a=1.00,b=5.00,d=5.00,s=10.00,bs/ad=10 a=1.00,b=2.00,d=5.00,s=1.00,bs/ad=0.4
MinimumcostatRPO=0.305 MinimumcostatRPO=0
ExponentialCostFunctionswithCostofDataLossIncreasingMoreRapidlythanRPO
Rule 2: The cost of lost datamustdecreaseslower thanthe increase insystem costas RPO approaches
0. Otherwise,theminimumcostpointisatRPO=0.
Thisruleisillustratedinthefollowinggraphic:
ExponentialfunctionswithcostofdatalossincreasinglessrapidlythanRPOincreases
In the previous case, both the lost-data cost and system cost curves
total
were concave. If they had been convex, then the point of zero slope
would be a total cost maximum rather than a minimum. If one curve
data
is convex and one is concave, the point of zero slope could be either
loss
amaximumoraminimum. cost
total We illustrate this with the case of system
data exponentially changing data-loss complexity
loss
cost and system cost in which the
RPO->better
cost cost of lost data increases more
slowly than RPO increases. That is, as RPO gets larger, the cost of
system lost data flattens out and increases ever more slowly. The cost of lost
complexity
data and the system cost for this case can be represented by the
RPO better relations:
4
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Costoflostdata=d(1-e-aRPO)
Costofsystem=s(e-bRPO)
Thetotalcostisthen
Totalcost=C=d(1–e-aRPO)+s(e-bRPO)
Settingthederivativeoftotalcosttozerotofindtheminimumcost(orthemaximumcost),wehave
dC/dRPO=ad(e-aRPO)–bs(e-bRPO)=0
e-aRPO/e-bRPO=bs/ad
e(b-a)RPO=bs/ad
SolvingforRPO:
(b-a)RPO–ln(bs/ad)
minimumRPO=ln(bs/ad)/(b-a)forminormax
Thisresultalsohasaninterestinginterpretation.Ifbs<ad orb<a, butnotboth,theminimumRPO is
negative.Inthiscase,thebestsolutionwillbethesystemconfigurationforRPO=0.
Ifbs>adandb>a,therewillbeanRPOcorrespondingtoaminimumtotalcost.However,ifbs<adand
b<a(anegativedividedbyanegative),thepointofzeroslopeofthetotalcostwillrepresentamaximum
cost,notanegativecost.TheminimumcostwilleitherbeforRPO=0orforthemaximumRPO.
bs >ad bs< ad, b < a
Datacostflatteningout Datacostflatteningout
12.000 1.400
10.000 1.200
1.000
8.000 t t
s s
o 0.800 o
C C
6.000 l l
a a
t 0.600 t
o o
4.000 T T
0.400
2.000 0.200
0.000 0.000
2.0 1.5 1.0 .5 0 2.0 1.5 1.0 .5 0
ImprovingRPO--> ImprovingRPO-->
a=1.00,b=5.00,d=5.00,s=10.00,bs/ad=10 a=2.00,b=1.00,d=1.00,s=1.00,bs/ad=0.5
Exponential Cost FunctionswithCost of DataLoss Increasing Less RapidlythanRPO
Example3:Real-WorldCosts
Amoreaccuraterepresentationoftherealworldis:
5
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

 ThecostoflostdatadecreaseslinearlyasRPO
approaches0.
 Thecostofthesystemincreasesinstepsasone
movesfromonearchitecturetoanothermore
complexarchitecturetoreduceRPO.
Therefore,thetotalcostissteppedasamoveismade
fromonearchitecturetoanother.
Thetotalcostcanbedeterminedgraphicallyfairly
simply:
 Therewillbemanyminimumtotalcostpoints
 Eachminimumtotalcostwilloccurjustbeforeasystemcostincrease.
 Choosetheabsoluteminimum.
 Theremaybemorethanoneabsoluteminimum.Inthiscase,choosetheminimumwiththe
smallestRPO.
Notethatintheabovegraphicalexample,systemcostisincreasingslowerthatdata-losscostis
decreasinguptothe“best”RPO.Thereafter,systemcostincreasesmorerapidlythandatalossis
decreasing.SeeRule1.
Meeting an RTO
The cost analysis of meeting an RTO is similar to the analysis presented above for RPO. It is only
necessary to replace “RPO” with “RTO” and the data-loss curves with downtime curves showing the
increasingcostofdowntime.
The system that minimizes RPO may not meet the required RTO. For instance, consider a system that
must be “always up,” but the data is not terribly important (such as a GPS application – if the system
forgets where you are because it lost some data, it can quickly reconstruct where you are via another
GPSreading).
AssumethattheobjectivesareanRPOoffourhoursandanRTOoftenseconds.Avirtualdiskbackupto
a cold standby system might meet the RPO specification, but it would not meet the RTO specification.
TheRTOrequirementmightrequireasynchronousreplicationtoahotstandbysystem.
Therefore,onemustchosetheleastexpensivesystemthatmeetsboththeRPOandtheRTOobjectives.
Rule3:ThechosensystemarchitecturemustmeetboththeRPOandtheRTOspecifications.
Summary
Thepropersystem configurationtomeetanRPOspecificationcanbedeterminedbyplottingtotalcostas
afunctionofRPO:
 AsRPOisimproved,thecostofdatalossdecreasesandthecostofthesystemincreases.
 So long as the cost of data loss decreases slower than the cost of the system increases as
RPOapproaches0,therewillbeanoptimalRPOtominimizecost.
 If the cost of data loss decreases faster than the cost of the system increases with improved
RPO,thesystemprovidingazeroRPOwillbethe minimumcostsystem.
6
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

The optimum system to meet an RTO specification can be determined in the same way that RPO cost is
analyzed. However, just because a system meets the RPO specification does not mean that it will meet
theRTOspecification.Thesystemmustbeconfiguredtomeetboth.
Acknowledgement
Wewouldliketothankoursubscriber,Dr.BruceHolenstein,forsuggestingthistopic.
7
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com