Equifax Hacked for Data on 143 Million Consumers
September 2017
One of the largest breaches in history of consumers’ private financial data occurred in
mid-2017. From May to July, the personal information of millions of individuals was
stolen by hackers from Equifax. In addition, the hackers gained access to the credit-card
information of a large number of cardholders.
While not the largest data breach in history, it may be the most damaging. It revealed personally
identifiable information on nearly 100% of the U.S. workforce as well as consumers from other countries.
Stolen were names, addresses, Social Security numbers, and dates of birth.
The hackers that breached Equifax’s servers exploited a security vulnerability in Apache Struts.
Because of the magnitude of this hack, I was probably personally affected. In this article, I describe how
the data breach was accomplished and what you can do to protect yourself. This is advice that I definitely
plan to follow.
Equifax
Equifax is a credit-reporting agency. It collects information on more than 800 million consumers
worldwide. It is the oldest of the three largest American credit agencies along with Experian and
TransUnion.
The Breach
On July 29, 2017, Equifax’s security team observed suspicious traffic accessing its web site. It blocked
the traffic but noted continued unauthorized access the following day. Equifax took the affected web site
offline and on August 2nd contracted with cybersecurity firm Mandiant to review the scope of the intrusion.
Mandiant determined that the hacking had begun in mid-May and that information concerning 143 million
people had been obtained by the hackers. Names, addresses, Social Security numbers, birth dates, and
in some cases driver’s licenses had been obtained. In addition, credit-card numbers for 209,000 U.S.
cardholders had been compromised. Information on some Canadian and U.K. consumers was also
obtained.
The hacking was accomplished via a vulnerability in the Apache Struts application. Apache Struts is an
open-source web application framework for developing Java-based web applications. The vulnerability
was discovered and patched in mid-March, 2017.
Just days after the patch was released, cyber criminals attacked those who had failed to patch the exploit.
Included in these attacks was Equifax. By the time the Equifax hack began in mid-May, Equifax had about
1
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

two months to apply the patch. Its failure to do so allowed hackers access to the Equifax database and
led to the theft of information on millions of consumers.
Why didn’t Equifax update its software when it became aware of the danger? Applying the patch was a
labor-intensive task requiring the rebuilding of older, bug-plagued versions of Equifax. Consequently,
Equifax delayed applying the patch.
Equifax believes that the unauthorized access occurred from May 13 through July 30, 2017, when it took
its web site offline. Equifax has created a dedicated web site at www.equifaxsecurity2017.com, where
consumers can understand whether they were affected by the hack and learn how to protect themselves.
How To Protect Yourself
If you are concerned that you may have been one of the consumers whose information was stolen, there
are several steps you can take to protect yourself:
1.Check whether you were affected:
Equifax is providing a free tool that checks whether your information was part of the recent data
breach.
2. Put a fraud alert on your credit report:
Ask one of the credit bureaus (Equifax, Experian, TransUnion) to put a fraud alert on your credit
history. This will make it harder for anyone to impersonate you or affect your credit. You will also
get a free copy of your credit report.
3. Review your credit report:
Scan your credit report to determine if there is any strange or suspicious activity.
4. Freeze your credit report:
Though this is a somewhat drastic step, it is a good way to ensure that no one else can
impersonate you and ruin your credit score. You can unfreeze it at any time.
The Aftermath
The enormity of the Equifax hack had an immense impact on its market value, with its shares dropping
33% when it revealed the hack. This represented a $6 billion drop in its market capitalization.
The Federal Trade Commission and the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau have opened
investigations into the hack.
Equifax Wasn’t the Only One
It turns out that over 3,000 organizations downloaded the same Apache Struts module in the last twelve
months. Additionally, almost 50,000 organizations downloaded versions of Struts with known
vulnerabilities despite perfectly safe versions being available. Consequently, upwards of 50,000
organizations may be vulnerable to attack.
Summary
This is a painful example that teaches us that cyber resilience begins and ends with the Board of
Directors and the senior executives of the company. It they had ensured that Equifax had applied the
exploitation fix as soon as it became available, this hack would not have occurred.
From its annual reports, it is clear that customers, growth, shareholders, and investors mattered more to
Equifax than managing cyber risk, privacy, or information security. In a keyword search through five years
2
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

of Equifax annual reports, researchers found terms such as risk management, cyber risk, privacy, data
security, data breach, or information security that were barely mentioned. The other credit rating
agencies, Experian and TransUnion, are somewhat more likely to mention privacy and risk management.
One of the problems that these companies bring upon themselves is that risk management is treated as a
cost center rather than as an imperative.
The CEO of Equifax will testify about the breach before Congress on October 3, 2017.
Acknowledgements
Information for this article was taken from the following sources:
Here’s How to Protect Yourself from the Equifax Hack, Popular Mechanics; September 8, 2017.
Equifax Data Breach: Unpatched Apache Struts Vulnerability Was Exploited in Hack, IB Times;
September 14, 2017.
The Kiplinger Letter, Kiplinger; September 15, 2017.
Equifax Had Patch, Didn’t Install It, USA Today; September 15, 2017.
Equifax Releases Details on Cybersecurity Incident, Announces Personnel Changes, Equifax; September
15, 2017.
The Equifax Breach and 5 Years of Missed Warning Signs, Huffington Post; September 17, 2017.
3
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman
