High Availability IT Services
Dr.TerryA.Critchley
January2015
“If you think high availability is expensive, try downtime.” With these words, Dr. Terry
Critchley paints an exhaustive picture in his book “High Availability IT Services,”
explaining how we can protect our critical applications effectively and economically from
theplethoraoffaultsthatcantakethemdown.
Terry’s style is refreshingly informal and conversational. Even his most difficult
topics are described in easily understood terms with frequent vignettes relating his
personal experiences that have spanned over four decades in the IT industry.
Moreover, Terry adds significant depth to each topic with frequent references to
moredetailedworks,completewithURLsforeasyaccesstotheseresources.
Terry’s book covers the entire gamut of high-availability topics, from hardware
resiliencetosoftwarereliabilitytoServiceLevelAgreements(SLAs)andeventothe
worstoffender,thehumanfatfinger.Thebook focusesnotonhardwareor software
reliability, but rather on service reliability. A service is a business support function
that depends upon people, products, and processes. The book analyzes each of
theseservicecomponentsingreatdetail.
Thebook begins withadiscussionof availabilityconcepts andterms andlooks atthecostof downtime.It
stresses that change is the enemy of availability. The structure of a proper SLA is examined, and the
basic requirements to achieve high availability are set forth. These requirements lead to discussions of
high-availability architectures, including redundant server configurations, clusters, grid computing, and
RAIDdiskarrays.
A simple look at the mathematics behind availability theory provides insight into how serial and parallel
architectures affect reliability. This mathematical introduction is expanded in great detail in an Appendix
that can be referenced by the theorist who needs to calculate the potential availability of a proposed
system.
The elimination of planned downtime is addressed along with the many causes of unplanned downtime.
The role that networks play in service availability is discussed, and an extensive review of software
reliability is accompanied by many references. The role of managing the high-availability project and its
ensuing operation is covered in some detail. Offerings by many vendors of high-availability solutions are
described.
The book continues with discussions of the availability considerations for OLTP (online transaction-
processing) systems, virtualized systems, and clouds. A high-availability architecture is of little use if it
cannot recover from an outage, so the book concludes with the disaster-recovery strategies that make
high-availabilitywork.
1
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

HarrisKernoftheEnterpriseComputingInstitutereviewedthebookwiththefollowingobservations:
“I’vebeenanITExecutiveforthepast40+years.MyfocushasalwaysbeenonPeople,Processes
andTechnologyandinthatorder.WhendiscussingHighAvailability,mostITprofessionalsgravitate
towardsthetechnologyforsolutionsastheirprimaryfocus,whichisunderstandable;afterall
Technologymakestheheadlines.However,ifthepeopleandprocessesarenotinvolvedinthe
equation,highavailabilitywillbenothingbutapipedream,whichwillneverbeattained.
“HighAvailabilityITServicescoverstheentirespectrumofpeople,services,processesandtools
requiredtobuilda‘world-class’computingenvironment.ItisthemostthoroughbookI’veeverhadthe
pleasureofreading.”
The extensive 20-page Table of Contents of the 500-page book makes it easy to find the coverage for
anyspecific topic.Attheexpensive of someredundancy, anychapter canbe readindependentlyof other
chapterssinceeachtopicdescriptioniscompletewithinitself.Thismakesthebookanextremelyvaluable
reference. Pull it off the shelf, browse the Table of Contents, locate the material you need, and become
aninstantexpert.
Assuch,“HighAvailabilityITServices”isanextremelyvaluableresourceforITprofessionalswhoneedto
become familiar with high-availability technology, for their management, for graduate programs in high-
availabilitysystems,andevenforcurrenthigh-availabilitypractitionerslikemyself.
Dr. Critchley is a retired IT consultant living near Manchester in the United Kingdom. He began his
studies atManchesterUniversity,whereheobtainedanhonorsdegreeinphysics.Hewentontoearnhis
PhD in nuclear physics. He joined IBM and spent 24 years in a variety of specializations before joining a
major U.K. bank. In 1993, he coauthored the book “Open Systems: The Reality” for the British Computer
Society. Havingcompleted his currenttome,“High AvailabilityIT Services,” heis now workingonhis next
book,probablytobeentitled“ServicePerformanceandManagement.”
Published byCRC Press, “High AvailabilityIT Services is available from Amazon and Barnes and Noble.
Simplysearchonthebook’stitle.
2
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com