How HPE is Making Blockchain Resilient1
July 2017
Blockchain. Oh, no! Another new technology about which I know nothing. That
statement summarized my feelings about blockchain until I heard a presentation from
HPE’s Matt Riesz at the May 2017 NYTUG meeting in Berkley Heights, New Jersey
(USA). Matt is a superb speaker. His clear, concise explanation of how blockchain works elevated my
understanding from total ignorance to a “not nearly as dumb as I thought I was” level. This article is
based on Matt’s presentation.
Matt also explained how HPE has partnered with R3, the provider of the Corda open-source distributed
ledger technology (DLT) platform, to bring resilience and scalability to DLT applications. R3 leads a
consortium of more than 70 of the world’s largest financial institutions in the research and development of
blockchain database usage within financial systems. It was the consortium’s efforts that brought Corda
into fruition.2
At the recent HPE Discover conference in Las Vegas, R3 demonstrated Corda, now in public beta,
running on Integrity NonStop.
What Is a Blockchain?
A blockchain is a secure, append-only distributed database that is created by a collection of untrusted or
semi-trusted parties. The distributed nature of a blockchain allows parties to engage in transactions
without a trusted central authority. A copy of the blockchain is made available to all involved parties.
Transactions are organized into blocks. Each block contains a timestamp and a link to the previous block.
A checksum in each block header is calculated based on the block contents and on the checksum of the
previous block. Thus, blockchains are inherently resistant to modification of the data within a block. Once
recorded, the data in any given block cannot be altered retroactively without the alteration of checksums
in all subsequent blocks. This makes blockchains suitable for the recording of transactions that must
maintain their integrity. Oftentimes, users will ignore new transactions until several new blocks have been
appended to the blockchain to ensure that the transactions they are accessing are secure.
Blockchain systems assume that some parties engaged in a transaction may be dishonest. These
systems only need a majority of participants to be honest. Any party involved in a blockchain may create
a new block to be added to the chain. However, all parties involved in the blockchain vote on any new
block that is to be added. If a majority of the parties do not agree that the block is valid, it cannot be
added.
1 This article was originally published in The Connection and is republished here with the kind permission of The Connection.
2 R3 has explained that Corda, although inspired by blockchain architecture, is itself not a traditional blockchain platform.
1
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Marc Andreessen has said that the blockchain’s distributed consensus model is the most important
invention since the Internet itself. Marc is the co-author of Mosaic, the first widely used Web browser, and
the co-founder of Netscape.
Others have said that the blockchain will transform value exchange as profoundly as the Internet
transformed information exchange.
The First Blockchain Use – Bitcoins
Blockchains were introduced with Bitcoins. Bitcoin is a cryptocurrency. No physical
bitcoins exist. Rather, transactions take place directly between users without an
intermediary. The transactions are recorded in a public distributed ledger, a
blockchain. Since the system works without a central repository, bitcoins are the first
decentralized digital currency.
Bitcoins are stored in a digital wallet, which may be either in the cloud or on someone’s computer.
Bitcoins are totally anonymous. There is no need for either the buyer or the seller to provide identification.
Only the digital wallet ID is exposed. People can transfer bitcoins with each other via their digital wallets
using either mobile apps or their computers.
Bitcoins can be bought and sold on bitcoin exchanges. The largest bitcoin exchange, Mt. Gox, went belly-
up in 2014 after hackers stole almost a million bitcoins from it.
Bitcoins currently move about USD $185 million via 220,000 transactions a day. The total value of all
outstanding bitcoins is approximately USD $10 billion.
Blockchain’s Rapid Evolution
Blockchain is effectively a Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT), and DLTs are transforming business
models in the Financial Services Industry (FSI). FSI is making significant investments in proof-of-concepts
to support blockchain business cases.
However, current DLT vendors cannot support scalable, enterprise-grade solutions. Their implementation
models have proven to be too slow for rapidly evolving business and technology demands. They also are
not mature enough at this time to meet the enterprise and governance requirements of security, risk,
manageability, and performance, among other prerequisites. DLT technology must meet the pace of
change required by an organization.
Hurdles to DLT Adoption
What is required is an open and modular application framework for the development of blockchain
applications rather than the fragmented set of platform providers and point solutions that exist today.
Performance, scalability, and resiliency are below enterprise standards with high numbers of single points
of failure. These challenges must be met by robust blockchain foundational services such as accelerated
smart contract virtual machines and highly available environments such as HPE NonStop servers. There
is no blockchain-specific infrastructure or reference architecture at this time that provides a fault-tolerant
environment to run blockchain workloads at scale.
What’s more, the small startups that currently dominate the blockchain market do not integrate well if at
all with existing technologies and standards. As such, it has been difficult to engage business units,
partners, the industry, regulators, and others for support and funding.
The R3 Consortium
2
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

A major player in the blockchain world is R3. R3 is a distributed database technology company that leads
a consortium of more than 70 of the world’s largest financial institutions in research and development of
blockchain database usage in the financial system.
The consortium’s efforts have created an open-source distributed ledger platform called Corda. Corda is
a distributed ledger in that the ledger is distributed across multiple platforms and shared with other
participants. Each participant has at least the part of the ledger in which it has participated, and the
participants collectively could assemble an entire ledger.
Corda is geared towards the financial world as it handles more complex transactions and restricts access
to transaction data. Although it is inspired by blockchain databases and has many of the benefits of
blockchains, it is not a blockchain. The aim of Corda is to provide a platform with common services to
ensure that any services built on top of it are compatible with the network participants.
How HPE Can Help
One of the interesting aspects of blockchain is that it is by its very nature resilient to faults. If a node fails
for any reason, all of the other nodes have a copy of the chain so it never goes away.
By comparison, Corda, being a SQL database, does have some possible fault-tolerant issues. For
instance, if a node dies, so does its portion of the distributed ledger.
Enter HPE NonStop, which has both a highly resilient and high-performance database, SQL/MX, and a
continuously available platform. HPE has announced that it has entered into a partnership with R3 to
bring Corda to Mission-Critical HPE Systems.3 HPE and R3 will bring Distributed Ledger Technology to
workloads that must run at enterprise scale. A proof of concept created in collaboration with HPE Labs,
HPE Mission Critical Systems, and R3 has demonstrated R3 Corda running on the HPE Integrity NonStop
platform, delivering the resiliency and scalability enterprise customers need as they bring their DLT
applications into production.
Via such partnerships, HPE can accelerate the selection of blockchain applications based on business
demands. It can enable Line of Business leadership to incorporate DLT solutions that will address
enterprise business goals. As with any new technology, there are risks; but HPE is well-positioned to
evaluate the challenges of a blockchain approach and to propose viable risk mitigations.
From the R3 perspective, HPE Integrity NonStop offers a proven reference architecture, one that delivers
reliability, performance, and scalability improvements as compared to other platform implementations.
HPE offers educational, advisory, and implementation services augmented by Blockchain-as-a-Service
offerings. In addition to R3, it maintains a multi-platform ecosystem with partners such as Ethereum and
Microsoft.
Ethereum is a full distributed blockchain implementation backed by a tradeable cryptocurrency. It offers
availability with predictable performance and resilience. It uses accelerated cryptography, shared
memory, and an enterprise-grade support ecosystem.
The Corda Distributed Ledger
HPE NonStop with R3 Corda uses an enterprise-grade message bus (HPE NSMQ) and a persistent data
store (SQL/MX). It provides linear scaleout and is suitable for physical and virtual NonStop platforms.
3 Just in – Exciting news about HPE and Blockchain
https://community.hpe.com/t5/Alliances/Just-in-Exciting-news-about-HPE-and-Blockchain/ba-
p/6967334#.WVVnahPyui4
3
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Corda provides the fundamental services of a blockchain but is not itself a blockchain. A blockchain
involves a specific architecture for implementing distributed ledgers. Corda has a different physical
implementation. The storage method for Corda is ANSI SQL rather than blockchain. This allows the
ledger to be queried with common query tools, though the data in the Corda ledger is encrypted. One
would need the encryption key in order to query the data in Corda.
Corda does not require each state change to be broadcast to all nodes. Unlike blockchains, it is designed
from the beginning as a distributed ledger to offer more robust and flexible storage of complete smart
contracts.
With Corda, there is no unnecessary global sharing of data. Only those parties with a legitimate
need to know can see the data within an agreement. Corda explicitly links human-language legal
prose documents to smart contract code for choreographed workflow between firms without a
central computer. It enables regulatory supervisory observer nodes. Transactions are validated by
parties to the transaction rather than by a broader pool of unrelated validators.
A Corda smart contract is an agreement automated by computer code working with human input
and control. The rights and obligations of the contract are legally enforceable, ensuring that the
financial agreements are rooted firmly in law.
A Summary Comparison of Blockchain and Corda
The following table summarizes the comparative attributes of blockchain and Corda:
Property Private Blockchain Corda
Data replication Broadcast to all bitcoin miner Only participant nodes hold data.
nodes
Data protection Cryptographic chain of blocks Cryptographic chain of records
Data structure Flat/unstructured SQL/structured
Reliability –platform Transparent node failure Node failure disruptive/outage
Reliability –data Data corruption transparent Avoided if using RAID
Scalability Scale-up; no real scale-out Scale-up and scale-out
Parallelism Not fully used Fully used
Transaction consistency Eventual - BASE Immediate – ACID
Consensus BFT4 & variations – system wide BFT & variations – private
Transaction validation Bitcoin miners Notary and participants
Smart contracts Add-on to architecture Built into architecture – Java VM
Performance Can be burdened by miner time Potentially better than blockchain
Cryptocurrency Bitcoin or other None
Distributed Ledger Technology has applicability in several areas, including:
• Financial – funds transfers, clearing/settlement, brokerage, mortgage.
• Medical – record keeping/sharing.
4 BFT – Byzantine Fault Tolerance, the characteristic of a system that tolerates the class of failures
known as the Byzantine Generals' Problem for which there is an unsolvability proof.
4
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

• Insurance – claims processing, document handling, liability insurance.
• Government records – property transfers, titles, licenses, elections/voting.
• Retail – gift cards, loyalty programs.
• Legal – digital notarizations, certificates, smart contracts.
• Education – records, grades, curriculum/course registration.
• Transportation – document tracking, digital signatures, fraud prevention.
• Energy – opportunities at electrical ‘grid-edge.”
• Libraries/documents/publishers – document handling and tracking, ties to payments.
• Smart contracts – two-party/multi-party.
• Controlled permissions – broad or restricted permissions for different party members.
• Provenance of creative assets – publicly verifiable registry (music, arts, patents).
Summary
R3’s Corda is designed specifically for the Financial Services industry, a major consumer of Integrity
NonStop’s ability to quickly scale resources for real-time, high-volume transactions. R3 brings to the new
partnership its expertise in distributed ledger and blockchain technologies. What it relies on from HPE is
NonStop’s acclaimed fault-tolerant environment, an impressive suite of HPE and partner solutions, and a
large customer base that looks to HPE for assistance as new DLT applications are brought into
production.
We once again want to thank HPE’s Matt Riesz for use of his blockchain slide presentation as the
foundation of this article.
5
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman
