Flywheel UPS Systems
January2014
Themanagementofdatacenters andtheprotectionof their systemsis atthemercyof power
reliability. Data centers require uninterrupted power of the highest quality. Power fluctuations,
harmonicdistortion,frequencyvariations,andvoltage reductions,muchlessthefulllossofpower,canbe
disastrouswithseriouscostandreputationalimplications.
Years ago, a data center could undergo an orderly shutdown if there was a disrupting power event. No
longer.Anorderlyshutdownleads toamajor outage, becauseitmaytakehours tobringservers,storage
devices,andthenetworkbackonline.
A recent Ponemon Institute survey1 of almost 600 data centers found that 85% had experienced at least
one power failure in the last 24 months. Ninety-one percent of these said that they had experienced
unplanned outages as a result of a power failure. Clearly, the reliability of primary utility power is a
considerationthatmustbedealtwith.
The need for UPS systems
WhatIsaUPSSystem
Power reliability is solved in modern-day data centers with backup generators. However, it takes several
secondsforageneratortostartupandcomeonline.Duringthistime,apowerlossoccursunlessthereis
another sourceof power thatcaninstantlycomeonlinefor atimelongenoughfor thegenerators tobegin
supplyingpower.
This other source of power is
an Uninterruptible Power
Supply (UPS) system. As
shown in Figure 1, a UPS
containsarechargeableenergy
source that is thrown into
service when the primary utility
power is lost. It provides power
to the data center until the
backup generators come into
service. Should there be a
generator failure, the UPS
system provides power for a
long enough period of time to
support an orderly shutdown of
1StudyofDataCenterOutages,PonemonInstitute;Sept.10,2013
1
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

thesystemsinthedatacenter.
A typical UPS system is shown in Figure 1. Its first job is to clean utility power to the standards required
bythedatacenter.Todothis,the potentiallydirtyutilitypower is fedtoarectifier intheUPSsystem.The
rectifier converts the AC (alternating current) utility power to DC (direct current). This relatively clean
power is then converted back to AC byan inverter in the UPS system to provide clean power to the data
center.
In the event of a utility power failure, an automatic transfer switch detects the power loss and rapidly
connects the UPS rectifier to the emergency generator system. The UPS generates the controls to start
thegeneratorandpowerisrestoredtothedatacenter.
One problem with this approach is that there will be a several second outage to the data center, which is
likely to be disastrous. This is where the ‘uninterruptible’ in “UPS” comes in. Connected to the DC bus
from the rectifier to the inverter in the UPS is a device that stores energy in DC form.When the output of
the rectifier fails, the energy from the DC storage device feeds the inverter and keeps power flowing to
the data center until the emergency generators can come online. This is typically a time measured in
seconds.
In addition to this delay, the automatic transfer switch is often designed to not switch to the backup
generator for afewseconds sothatbrief utilitypower outages donotdepletethe DC energystored inthe
DC storage device. Eighty percent of power outages last less than two seconds, and 98% last less than
tenseconds.
There are two types of DC storage devices in common use in UPS systems today – batteries and
flywheels. Though batteries are the predominant form of DC storage device in use, they have several
disadvantagesthatareovercomebyflywheelstoragedevices.
Disadvantages of Battery Systems
Batterystoragesystems havenotproventobereliable.ThePonemonstudyreferencedabovefoundthat
55% of respondents blamedbatteryfailure as theroot causeof an outage due to aprimarypower failure.
Humanerrorcameinsecond.
A typical data center operating on one megawatt of power will have about five strings of 40 batteries
each. This is a total of 200 batteries. The failure of any one battery will take its string out of service.With
one string out, theremaynot be enough backup energyto provide data center power for the timeit takes
to get the generators online. This will cause a data center outage. Statistics show that 70% of UPS
servicecalls aretheresultofbadbatteries.40% ofcaseswherepower was losttoacriticalload werethe
resultofbatteryfailures.
As a battery ages, its internal resistance goes up. This prevents the battery from delivering its rated
power. In manycases, the pending failure of a battery cannot be detected until the battery is called upon
todeliverpower.
Someotherdisadvantagesofbatteriesinclude:
 Environmental hazards (lead-acid batteries contain led plates and sulfuric acid and must be
disposedofproperly).
 Thecontinuingreplacementcostofbatteries.
 Largespacedemands.
 Fire hazard and explosion (the Planet experienced a battery-room explosion that took its data
centerdownforfourdays2).
2ThePlanetBlowsUp,AvailabilityDigest;September2008.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0309/planet_explosion.pdf
2
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

 Coolingrequirements(batteriesdegradeifnotcooledproperly).
 Therequirementforexcessiveamountsoftesting,monitoring,andmaintenance.
How a Flywheel UPS Works
A flywheel solves many of the problems associated with batteries. A flywheel can store energyjust like a
battery. The primarydifference is that a flywheel stores kinetic energy whereas a battery stores electrical
energy.
A flywheel is a disk that is spun up to a very
UPS
high speed, typically in a vacuum to reduce
primary datacenter
drag. Once it reaches its operating speed, it
power Rectifier DC Inverter power
takes very little additional energy to maintain
AC DC DC AC
thespeed.Currentflywheeltechnologyresults
in flywheel UPSs that are up to 98% efficient.
Thatis,ittakesonlyabout2%ofthedelivered
DC AC
power of the UPS to maintain the speed of a AC DC
flywheel(inbatteryterminology,tokeepitfully
charged). charge discharge
ACmotor-
generator
Theflywheel is connected to the DC bus via a
generator. Should the main power fail, the
generator driven by the flywheel continues to flywheel
deliver DC energytotheinverter andmaintain
the data center power until the backup
generators can come online. In battery
AFlywheelUPS
terminology, this is the discharge of energy
Figure2
fromtheflywheel.
In principle, a DC motor-generator is used. However, DC motor-generators require brushes and
commutators that are subject to wear and require maintenance. To solve this challenge, an AC motor-
generator, which does not have these problems, is often used as shown in Figure 2,. To interface the AC
motor-generator totheDC bus of theUPS,an inverter is usedtoconvertthe UPSDC bus voltage to AC,
which is then used to drive the AC motor-generator working as a motor to charge the flywheel. If the
primarypower fails,theenergyintheflywheelis used todrivetheAC motor-generator as agenerator.Its
AC output is converted to DC via a rectifier and is used to power the data center until the generators can
bebroughtonline.
Theamountof energystoredinaflywheelis proportionaltothemass of theflywheelandtothesquareof
its speed. Therefore, it makes engineering sense to trade mass for speed. Early flywheel UPSs used
steel disks and rotated at speeds in the order of 7,000 rpm. Newer flywheels use relatively light-weight
carbonfilamentsthathaveagreatdealmoretensilestrengththansteel.Theseflywheelsarespunattens
ofthousandsofrpms(aflywheelsystemfromVyconEnergyspinsat37,000rpm).
Equally important, the light mass of fiber filament flywheels means that they can be suspended by
magnetic bearings, as opposed to the mechanical bearings of older flywheels. The older mechanical
bearingsrequiredperiodicmaintenanceandreplacement.Magneticbearingsaremaintenance-free.
Most flywheel systems come with a remote monitoring capability. As opposed to batteries, it is easy to
measurethechargestoredinaflywheelsystem.Itisbasicallyjustthespeedofrotation.
A single flywheel system can deliver several hundred kilowatts of power. In fact, some existing
commercial systems provide over a megawatt of power. Think about it – 200 batteries can be replaced
withoneflywheelsystem!
3
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Thispowercanbedeliveredfortimesrangingfrom secondstominutesdependinguponhowmuchpower
must be delivered by the flywheel compared to its capacity. Figure 3 shows a typical range of power
usageversusUPStimeforaseriesofproductsfromVyconEnergy.
Formaximum availability,flywheelsystemscanbeinstalledin n+mconfigurations,wherenisthenumber
of flywheels needed to obtain the desired power, and m is the number of spares. All flywheels feed the
data center with power. If one flywheel fails, there are enough other flywheels to maintain power. These
configurationsalsoallowaflywheeltobetakenofflineforitsoccasionalmaintenance(inmostcases,only
onceeveryseveralyears).
Advantages of a Flywheel UPS
FlywheelUPSshaveseveraladvantagesoverbatteryUPSs:
 Instead of dozens of 100-pound containers of lead plates suspended in sulfuric acid, flywheel
UPSscontainnonoxiousmaterialsthatmustbedisposedofproperly.
 Flywheels charge (come up to speed) much faster than batteries. Typical charge time for a
flywheel is a few minutes. Batteries can take hours to charge. Consequently, flywheels are more
adeptathandlingsequentialpoweroutages,afrequentoccurrence.
 FlywheelUPSsdonotneedaspecialbatteryroomtoventexplosivebatteryfumes.
 Flywheel UPSs have a smaller footprint than battery UPSs. Somemanufacturers claim asavings
infloorspaceof75%.
 Flywheel UPSs require significantly less maintenance than battery UPSs. There is no need to
periodicallyreplacebatteries.
 Thetypicallifefor aflywheelUPS is twenty years.(Caterpillar claims a65-year MTBFfor its CAT
UPSsystemswhendeliveringfullpower.)
 It is easyto measure the charge stored in a flywheel by simplymeasuring its rotation speed. It is
difficulttomeasurethechargestoredinabatterysystem.
4
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

 Flywheelenergyefficiencyisgenerallygreaterthanbatteryefficiency(thoughbothareinthe90%
range).
 Flywheels can operate over a much wider temperature range than batteries and therefore need
lesscooling.
Where to Get One
There are many vendors of flywheel UPSs. The following list is only a smattering of flywheel UPS
vendors:
VyconEnergy http://vyconenergy.com/
CaterpillarCAT http://www.cat.com/en_US/power-systems/electric-power-generation/ups-
flywheel.html
Active/Power http://www.activepower.com/upssystems
POWERTHRU http://www.power-thru.com
Hitec http://www.hitec-ups.com/
Eaton http://powerquality.eaton.com/products-services/accessories/Flywheel.asp
BeaconPower http://beaconpower.com/
Summary
An uninterruptible power supply is a requirement for modern-day data centers to ensure that the data
center systems continue to operate during a primary power failure until the backup generators can be
broughtonline.Theclassic UPS uses lead-acid batteries to provideseveralseconds of power tothe data
centerwhilethebackupgeneratorsarebroughtintoservice.
However, battery-based UPS systems face several challenges. They use lead-acid batteries that are not
environmentally friendly. They are not as reliable as one would like – 55% of respondents to a survey
indicated that battery failure was the root cause of most of their data center outages due to the loss of
primary power. They are expensive to maintain and generally require a specially-constructed battery
room.Theyaredifficulttomonitorandtodetectbadbatteriesthatshouldbereplaced.
Thenewerflywheel-basedUPSsystemssolvethesechallenges.Theyarevirtuallymaintenance-freewith
MTBFs measured in years. Monitoring of flywheel health is simple as only the speed of rotation need by
measured.TherearemanyvendorsofflywheelUPSs capableofdeliveringoveramegawattofpowerper
UPS.FlywheelsmaywellbethefutureofUPSsystems.
Acknowledgements
Informationforthisarticlewastakenfromthefollowingsources:
Maintaining the Long Term Reliability of Critical Power Systems, Schneider Electric White Paper;
December2010.
Battery Failure, Human Error Still Cause Most Data Center Outages, Government Technology;
September17,2013.
GreeningtheDataCenter:FlywheelsandTrueITEfficiency,DataCenterJournal;October12,2013.
Next-GenerationDataCenter,NetworkComputing;October21,2013.
Flywheels,Wikipedia.
Variousvendorwebsites.
5
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com