Replicating Windows and Linux Environments with Double-Take
August2009
Double-Take(www.doubletake.com) is aunidirectional asynchronous data-replication enginethat
replicates file changes inWindows andLinux environments over unlimiteddistances.Itintercepts
file and directory changes and replicates these changes in real time to one or more target
systems,wheretheyareappliedtothetargetfilesystems.Likewise,multiplesourceservers1can
replicate their files to a single target system, where an image of each source file system is
maintained.
For data writes, Double-Take replicates only byte changes. Entire files need not be replicated,
thus minimizing network load and replication latency. Either upon command or automatically,
Double-Take will compare a target file system to its source and will correct any errors that have
occurred.
With Double-Take’s mirroring capability, files can be migrated to other systems by copying the
files first and then keeping them updated via replication. Users are unaffected during the
migrationprocess.
Should a source system failure occur, Double-Take can automatically fail over to the target
systemandfallbackifdesiredwhenthesourcesystemisreturnedtoservice.
Any file can be included in the list of files to be replicated. Thus, an entire server can be
replicatedtothetargetsystem.Shouldthesourceserver fail,theentireoperationalserver canbe
quickly restored onto the target system. Also, entire servers can be migrated from one system to
anotherwithoutaffectingtheusers.
The Double-Take Data Replication Engine
The Double-Take replication engine installs as a software component between the operating
systemandthefilesysteminWindowsandLinuxenvironments.
Double-Take intercepts file-system modification calls and queues them to be replicated to the
target system. File-system modification calls include not only data updates but also other calls
such as file creates and deletes, directory operations, file-parameter changes, user
authorizations,andsoon.
1Inthisarticle,“system”isusedtodenoteaphysicalsystem,and“server”describesalogicalserverrunningonaphysical
system.
1
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Double-TakeSourceSide
Figure 1shows a simplified diagram of theDouble-Takesource-system softwarecomponent.2As
file-system calls are issued to the operating system by an application, these calls are normally
passed to the file system for execution. However, Double-Take inserts itself into this flow to
accomplishreplication.
TheDouble-Takesourcesidecontainsthefollowingcomponents:
 File-SystemInterface(FSI)
 SourceReplicationManager(SRM)
 SourceCommunicationManager(SCM)
user
workstations
filesystemcommands
applications
operatingsystem
Double-Take
writes SourceRepl. SourceComm replicated
data
FileSystem Manager Manager
Interface(FSI) (SRM) Send (SCM)
queue
reads,writes
filesystem txlog
modifieddata
source
files
Double-TakeSourceServerSoftwareComponent
Figure1
File-SystemInterface(FSI)
The FSI is given a set of files for which replication is desired. This set can be specified by name,
by wild cards, by directory, or by volume. The FSI intercepts file-system calls directed to the file
system from theoperating system.If thecallis a read-onlycallthatmakes nomodification toany
file,itispasseddirectlytothelocalfilesystemforexecution.However,ifitisacallthatmodifiesa
file that is on Double-Take’s replication list, the call is intercepted. These commands include
writing data, creating files, deleting files, creating, renaming, or deleting a directory, changing file
or directory attributes, changing file ownership or permissions, and any other operation that
modifiesthefilesystem.
2Thefollowingdescriptionsofthesource-sideandtarget-sideDouble-TakecomponentsaretakenfromtheDouble-Take
patent,D.E.Beeler,Jr.,RealTimeBackupSystem,PatentNo.5,819,020;October6,1998.
2
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

The FSI will pass the file-system modification call to the local file system so that the call can be
executedonthesourcesystem.Inaddition,FSI willpasstheparametersofthecalltotheSource
ReplicationManagerforreplicationtothetarget.
SourceReplicationManager(SRM)
The role of the SRM is to control the flow of updates to the Source Communication Manager
(SCM). If the SCM is currently idle, the SRM will pass the command as a replication packet to
SCM for replication. If the SCM is currently busy, the SRM will place the replication packet in a
Sendqueueforlaterreplication.
A replication packet contains all the parameters describing the command to be replicated. These
parameters include the command, the file name, and if data is being changed, the offset, the
numberofbyteschanged,andthenewdata.
The Send queue is memory resident unless it grows too large, in which case it overflows to disk.
Thesize of the memory-residentqueue is configurable.Its sizecan be up to one gigabytefor 32-
bitsystemsandisunlimitedfor64-bitsystems.
SourceCommunicationManager(SCM)
The SCM receives write requests from the SRM or from the Send queue. It will check to see if
anyotherreplicationpacketsintheSendqueuecontainoverlappingorcontiguousupdatestothe
samefile.If theupdates canbe packagedinto asingleupdate that willfit within acommunication
block,theyareaggregatedandsentasasinglechange.
The SCM logs every command that it replicates into a temporary memory-resident transaction
log.Whenthetargetsystemacknowledgesthatithasmadethechange,thelogentryisremoved.
If thetargetsystem does notrespondpositively, either thechange was lostintransmissionor the
target system was unable to apply it. In this case, the replication is retried. If the failure persists,
the log entryis marked as an error and is kept in the log file. The Double-Take replication engine
is rebooted, and an attempt is made to resynchronize the target file system and to continue
replication.
The replication channel can be any IP communication link. Source and target systems can be
separatedbyarbitrarydistancesbyusingWANchannels.TheSCMcanbedirectedtouseonlya
certainportionofthebandwidthsoastonotlock outotherapplicationactivitythatisbeingcarried
overthenetwork.
As anoption,theSCMcan operateinsynchronous mode.Inthis mode,thechangetothesource
file system is held up until the target has acknowledged success. If the target system cannot
makethechange,thechangeisabortedandisnotmadetoeithersystem.
As further options, the SCM can encrypt and/or compress messages being transmitted. Four
levelsofcompressionaresupported,includingnocompression.
Replication latency can be measured in seconds unless the communication channel becomes
heavilyloaded. Alternatively,replicationcanbescheduledatintervals toreducereplicationloadif
thepotentialconsequenceofdatalossduetosource-systemfailureisfoundtobeacceptable.
3
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Double-TakeTargetSide replicated
operatingsystem
data
As shown in Figure 2, the Double-Take
target-system software component
Double-Take
comprisesthefollowingmodules:
TargetComm TargetRepl.
 TargetCommunicationManager Manager Manager
(TCM) (TCM) (TRM)
 TargetReplicationManager
(TRM)
TargetCommunicationManager(TCM) filesystem
Double-TakeTarget-System
As in the source system, Double-Take
SoftwareComponent
positions itself between the operating
Figure2 target
system and the file system at the target
files
side. Replication packets received by
the operating system are passed to the TCM. The TCM passes these to the Target Replication
Managerforapplicationtothetargetfilesystem.
The replication packets are sequenced-numbered to ensure that changes are applied in the
correct order to maintain database integrity. Should a replication packet be missing in the
replication stream, TCM pauses the passing of replication packets to TRM, thus pausing
replication until the missing packet has been received. Unacknowledged replication packets are
retransmittedbythesourceSCMtoeffectpacketrecovery.
TargetReplicationManager(TRM)
The TRM receives replication packets from the TCM and executes the file-system commands
containedinthosepackets.
While replication is taking place, the target file cannot be opened for query or writes. By turning
off Double-Take file locking, a target application can open a file. However, while it has the file
opened, replication is paused. There is no mechanism to prevent an application on the target
systemfromwritingtoafile,andinmostcasesthiswouldcorruptthefile.
System Replication and Recovery
Double-Take is given a list of files (by volume, by directory, by wild cards, or by name) to be
replicated. These files can include any file, not only data files. Operating system files, application
executables, registries, DLLs, patches, service packs, event logs, system settings, and other
informationcanallbereplicated.Therefore,anentireservercanbereplicated.
Should the source system fail, the operating system, applications, data files, configurations, and
all other information are already resident on the target system. All that needs to be done to
recoveroperationstothetargetsystemistostartuptheoperatingsystemandapplicationsandto
movetheusers.Recoverycanbedoneinminutes.
Since Double-Take supports a single target system holding the replicates of several source
servers,asingletargetsystemcanprovideaconsolidatedbackupformanyservers.
4
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Server Restoration
By simply reversing replication, Double-Take can restore a system that has gone down. In this
way, an original source system can be returned to full service when it has been repaired. Once
the original source file system has been synchronized with the current operational file system,
userscanbereturnedtotheoriginalsystemtorestorethenormalsystemconfiguration.
The restoration of the file system is accomplished via Double-Take’s file mirroring capability that
copies files from one system to another. If the failed system has not been down long, the
restoration of files can optionallybe sped up byreplicating onlyfile blocks that have changed. To
do this, rather than replicating a file block, Double-Take will calculate a checksum for the source
fileblock andsendittothetargetsystem.Ifthechecksumforthatblock atthetargetisthesame,
that block need not be replicated. Only if the checksums are different are the blocks replicated.
The size of the replication block can be adjusted to optimize mirroring speed when checksum
replicationisused.
Replicationtoafilecontinuesduringthemirroringprocess.However,thetargetsystemwillqueue
the replicated changes until the mirror has completed. The queued changes are then applied to
thefiletobringitintosynchronization.
Server Migration
Using the same technique as system restoration, Double-Take can be used to migrate servers,
for instance, from an old hardware platform to a newer, more powerful platform. Migration is
accomplished with no impact on the user. The entire file set is copied from the old system to the
new system while the old system remains active. The new server is tested, and users are then
movedovertoit.
The old server can be kept operational for a while to ensure that the new server is operating
satisfactorily. If problems arise, users can bemoved back to the old server until the problems are
resolved.
Replicating Virtual Environments
Double-Take is at home in virtual environments as well as physical environments. It supports
Microsoft’s Hyper-V and VMware’s ESX hypervisors and can replicate these environments over
arbitrarydistances.
For virtual environments that use a host operating system, Double-Take can be used in one of
two ways. It can either replicate individual virtual machines to different physical hosts, or it can
replicatethehostoperatingsystemwithallofitsvirtualmachinestoanotherphysicalsystem.
If the hypervisor is a bare-metal hypervisor like ESX, the virtual machines themselves can be
individually replicated. In addition, Double-Take has been integrated with ESX at the kernel level
sothattheentirephysicalmachinewithallofitsguestoperatingsystemscanbereplicated.
Using Double-Take, replication can be configured between physical and virtual environments. In
addition to replication to another physical server (P2P), a physical server can be replicated to a
virtual machine (P2V). Virtual machines can be replicated to other virtual machines (V2V) or to
physicalservers(V2P).
Replicating Cluster Environments.
ClustershavetwomajorproblemsthatcanbesolvedwithDouble-Take’sGeoClusterproduct:
5
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

 The shared disk volumes represent a single point of failure. Even if they are redundant,
they must be collocated and are subject to a site disaster. With Double-Take, the nodal
databases can be replicated to other nodes in the cluster or to nodes in another cluster
thatcantakeovershouldtheshareddatabasefail.
 Because the nodes in the cluster need to be close to the shared database, they are
subject to a data-site disaster. Using Double-Take, a disaster-recovery cluster can be
establishedthousandsofmilesaway.
GeoCluster prevents a failover to a node with a suspect file system. Failover is only allowed to
nodeswithaknowngoodfilesystem.
Replicating Cloud Environments
Compute clouds and storage clouds may be the wave of the future, but todaythey are inherently
unreliable.3 It is imperative that any critical applications running in the cloud be backed up, either
by running separate instances in the cloud with separate and geographically-distributed file
systemsorbybackinguptheprocessingcapabilityanddatastorageonanothersystem.
Double-Take can provide a cloud backup facility via its data-replication capabilities. It currently
supportsAmazon’sEC2(ElasticComputingCloud)computecloud.
System Management
The Double-Take Application Manager (DTAM) is used to manage the Double-Take replication
environment:
 Itensuresthattheapplicationenvironmentisconfiguredproperlyforreplication.
 It automatically establishes application data sets and configuration settings on the target
system.
 It controls the entire application protection process from configuration through failover,
datarestoration,andfallback.
 Itmaintainspersistenceofconfigurationsettings.
The Double-Take Dashboard monitors the health of the protected servers, the mirror status, and
theeventlogsononescreen.
Double-Take will forward replication statistics and events via SNMP for unified monitoring and
controlwithenterprisemanagementfacilities.
Double-Take can send event notifications via email. It can be configured to email different
recipientsforeachserverinthereplicationnetwork.
Operating-System Support
Replication must stay within the same operating system for any source/target combination.
Cross-operating system replication is not supported. Though the operating systems may be
different versions on the source and target systems, the Double-Take version must be the same
onbothsystems.
3TheFragileCloud,AvailabilityDigest;June2009.
6
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Windows
Double-Take can replicate between physical or virtual machines running Windows Server 2008
Enterprise, HPC, Standard,Web, Small Business Server, Enterprise x64 or Standard x64. It also
supports Windows Server 2003 or 2003 R2 Enterprise, Standard, Web, Small Business Server,
Enterprise x64 or Standard x64. All Windows 2003 operating systems require Service Pack 1 or
later.
Invirtualenvironments,Microsoft’sHyper-VorVMware’sESX3.0.1aresupported.
Replication can be done between any Windows environments, though replicating to an earlier
versionofWindowsmaycreateproblems.
Linux
Within a Linux environment, replication may be between Red Hat Enterprise Linux and/or
CentOS.ReplicationcanalsobedonebetweenSUSELinuxEnterpriseenvironments.
Summary
Double-Take, via its file-system replication capabilities, provides many options for disaster-
recoverysites andmigrations withnoplanneddowntime.ItsupportsWindows andLinux servers.
Replicationcanbebetweenphysicalsystems,virtualmachines,andcloudfacilities.
Headquartered in Southborough, Massachusetts, Double-Take is a Nasdaq-listed public
company(DBTK) with almost20,000customers inavarietyof industries.Installations rangefrom
two servers to several hundred servers. Many industries are active users of Double-Take,
including financial (over 1,000 institutions), sporting, health care (over 1,100 hospitals),
hospitality,realty,educational(over1,000highschoolsandcolleges),andgovernment.
7
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com