Configuring to Meet a Performance SLA – Part 4:
Single Server with General Service Time
March2009
Many applications carry with them a performance Service Level Agreement (SLA) that specifies
the response times they must achieve. After all, if an application’s response time is so slow that
theapplicationisnotuseful,theapplicationis,ineffect,down.
The performance requirement is often expressed as a probability that the system’s transaction-
responsetimewillbelessthanagiveninterval.For instance,“Whenhandling50 transactionsper
second,98%ofalltransactionsmustcompletewithin500milliseconds.”
In Part 1 of this series, we derived the basic average response-time expression for a single-
serversystem.InPart2,weextendedthatresulttoamultiserversysteminwhichmultipleservers
work off a common work queue. In Part 3, we showed how to size a system to meet a
performanceSLAifservicetimeisexponentiallydistributed.
If service time is not exponentially distributed, the solution is more complex and involves the
Gammadistribution.Inthis part, weextend our analysis of Part3 toservers with generalservice-
timedistributions.
First,wereviewtheresultsofthefirstthreepartsofthisseries.
Reviewing the Average Response Time for a Single Server
InPart1, weshowedthattheaverageresponsetimefor asingle-server system was givenbythe
Pollaczek-Khintchineequation:
T
T  s [1(1k)L] (1)
r 1L
where
T istheaveragetransaction-responsetime.
r
T istheaverageservicetimeoftheserver.
s
L istheloadontheserver.
k isthedistributioncoefficientoftheserver’sservicetime.
Thedistributioncoefficient kdependsupontheprobabilitydistributionoftheserver’sservicetime.
For instance, k = 1 applies to server distribution times that are random (that is, exponentially
distributed),whichisthecommonassumption.1Inthiscase,Equation(1)reducesto
1Morespecifically,kis1/2theratiooftheservicetime’ssecondmomenttothesquareofitsmean.
1
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

T
T  s (2)
r (1L)
For many of you, Equation (2) is the well-recognized expression relating transaction-response
timetoserverload.
The response times for exponential service-time distributions (k = 1), uniform service-time
distributions (k =2/3),andconstantservice-timedistributions (k =1/2) areshown inFigure1.This
chart shows the response time, T, relative to the service time, T , (that is, T/T ) as a function of
r s r s
serverload.
SingleServerResponseTime
Figure1
Reviewing the Average Response Time for a Multiserver System
Thecalculationofresponsetimeforamultiserversystemismorecomplex,asshowninPart2.In
a multiserver system, several like servers process transactions from a common work queue.
Examples of such servers are web farms and transaction-processing monitors, such as Tuxedo
andNonStopPathway,whichdistributetransactionstoapoolofservers.
Using c to reflect the number of servers in the multiserver system, Figure 2 shows transaction-
response time normalized to service time (T /T ) as a function of load for multiserver systems
r s
using 1, 2, 4, 8, and 16 servers. The improvement in response time as servers are added is
readilyapparent.
6.00
5.00
c=1
4.00
Tr/Ts 3.00
2
4
2.00
8
16
1.00
0.00
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1.0
L
MultiserverTransactionTime
Figure2
2
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Reviewing the SLARequirements for Exponential Service Times
InPart3, our attention was turnedto determining what average response timeis needed in order
to meet an SLA requirement such as “At 50 transactions per second, 98% of all transactions will
complete within 500 msec.” We did this first for the case of exponentially-distributed service
times.
The result is shown in Figure 3 for various values of m, where m = T / T is the ratio of the
m s
specified response time, T , to the service time, T . For instance, assume that the server has a
m s
service time of 10 milliseconds. If 95% of all transactions are to complete in less than 60 msec.
(m=6),wecanloadtheserverupto50%.
1.0
0.9
10
0.8
8
0.7
6
0.6
4
Load 0.5
3
0.4
0.3
m=2
0.2
0.1
0.0
0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
Probability (T <mT)
r s
AllowableLoadToMeetPerformanceSLA
Figure3
SLA Requirements for General Service Times
If the service time of the server is not exponentially distributed, the analysis becomes more
complex. What we need to know is the distribution of the response times so that we can
determinethehigh-endtailthatwearetoavoidwiththespecifiedprobability.
Fortunately, there is a distribution that has been shown to be a reasonable approximation of the
distributionofresponsetimesforaserver withanarbitraryservice-timedistributionsolongasthe
arrivalsattheserverarerandom.ThisistheGammadistribution.2
TheGammaDistribution
The Gamma distribution comes with a compelling history. In the early days of telephony, the
Erlang distribution, developed by A. K. Erlang, was used to determine the number of telephone
calls that might be waiting for telephone operators. This work has been expanded to determine
the distribution of waiting times in queuing systems in general. The resulting probability
distribution is the Gamma function. It has been shown to give surprisingly close results to actual
responsetimesmeasuredinpracticeorbysimulation.
2JamesMartin,Chapter31,QueuingCalculations,pp.438-444,SystemsAnalysisforDataTransmission,Prentice-Hall;
1972.
3
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

The Gamma function provides the probability that a variable will have a value less than a
specified value – just what we need. It depends upon only one parameter represented by R,
whichistheratioofthesquareofthedistribution’smeantoitsvariance.
Sinceweareinterestedinthedistributionofresponsetime,forourpurposesRisgivenby
 2
T
r
R (3)
var(T)
r
where
T istheresponsetime
r
T isthemean(average)responsetime
r
var(T )isthevarianceofT .
r r
Thus, if we can determine the mean and the variance of the response time of a server, we can
make a statement about the probability that the response time will be less than a certain value.
Asitturnsout,thevarianceoftheresponse-timedistributionisafunctionofload.Moreaboutthis
later.
The mathematical representation of the Gamma function is not very palatable (see page 439 of
the above footnote referencing Martin’s book). Fortunately, Excel comes to the rescue with its
GAMMADISTfunction.Forourpurposes,weuse
Probability(T <T )=(GAMMADIST(zR,R,1,TRUE) (4)
r m
wherezistheratioofthemaximumspecifiedresponsetimetothemeanresponsetime:
maximum responsetime T
z  m (5)
meanresponsetime T
r
andT isthemaximumspecifiedresponsetime.3
m
For R = 1, the Gamma distribution becomes the exponential distribution; and our analysis of Part
3holds.ForR=∞(i.e.,variance=0),theGammadistributionbecomesaconstantdistribution.
ThisdistributionisshowninFigures4aand4b.Figure4bexplodesthehigherprobabilities.
Forinstance,ifwewanted99%ofallresponsestobelessthanthreetimestheaverageresponse
time (T /T =3), we find from Figure 4b that this can be met if R ≥ 2.5. From Equation (3), this
m r
means that the variance of the response time must be less than the 0.4 of the mean response
time squared. If the mean response time is 10 msec., its variance must be less than 0.4 x 100 =
40. (The standard deviation of the response time is the square root of the variance, or 6.3 msec.
inthiscase.)
CalculatingtheSLAParameters
This is all well and good, but it doesn’t really tell us what we want to know. We are missing two
parameters.Weneedtoknowhowmuch wecan load theserver such thattheresponse timewill
be less than some multiple of the server’s service time with a stated probability. We need to
convertvariancetoloadandmeanresponsetimetomeanservicetime.
3 The third parameter, “1,” returns the standard Gamma distribution. The parameter “TRUE” returns the cumulative
distribution. “FALSE” returns the probability density function. Excel also provides an inverse Gamma function, which
provideszR=GAMMAINV(P,R,1).
4
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

1.00
6
4
0.98
3
0.96
0.94
probability
0.92
(T r Tm) Tm/Tr = 2
0.90
0.88
0.86
0.84
1 2 3 4 5 6
R= (T2)2/var(T )
R = T r/ var(Tr)
r r
AllowableVariancetoMeetSLA
Figure4a
1.000
6
0.995
5
4
probability
0.990
(Tr <Tm)
T /T =3
m r
0.985
0.980
1 2 3 4 5 6
2
RR==T( rT r/)2v/vaar(r(TT rr))
AllowableVariancetoMeetSLA
Figure4b
One way to do this is to perform response-time measurements on the real server, either under
actual conditions or under simulated conditions.Weknow the average service time of the server.
Byrunningtheserveratsomefixedknownload,themeanandvarianceoftheresponsetimecan
bemeasured. Knowing this, R can becalculated; and Figures 4a or 4bcan be usedto obtain the
probabilitythatresponsetimeswillbelessthansomemaximum.Wethenknowthattheresponse
time will be less than that maximum for the service time of the server and the load imposed on
theserver.
Letususetheaboveexampleandturnitupsidedown.Letus assumethatwehaveaserver with
a response time of 5 msec.We load it to 50% and measure the response times. Wefind that the
averageresponsetimeis10msec.,anditsvarianceis40.Therefore,theapplicablevalueofRis,
from Equation (3), (10)2/40, or 2.5. Using R = 2.5 in Figure 4b, we find that 99% of all responses
5
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

will be less than three times the average response time of 10 msec. Since the server’s service
timeis5milliseconds,wecanmaketheSLAstatementthat99%ofallresponses willcompletein
lessthansixservicetimes–thatis,inlessthan60msec.–whentheserveris50%loaded.
CalculatingResponseVarianceforKnownService-TimeDistributions
An actual measurement of the server can be avoided if we know the relationship between server
load, response time, and response-time variance. These relations do, in fact, exist for the cases
ofexponentialservicetimes,uniformservicetimes,andconstantservicetimes.4Let
T =meanservicetime
s
L =loadontheserver
T =meanresponsetime
r
var(T) =varianceoftheresponsetime
r
UsingEquation(1)tocalculateresponsetimebasedonservertimeandserver load,therelations
are:
 forexponentialservicetimes:
T
T  s
r (1L)
(6)
T2
var(T) s
r (1L)2
 foruniformservicetimes:
T  L
T r  (1s L) 1 3

(7)
T2 1 L2 
var(T) s   
r (1L)2 3 9 
 forconstantservicetimes:
T  L
T r  (1s L) 1 2

(8)
T2 L L2 
var(T) s   
r (1L)2 3 12
Thus, for these cases, an actual measurement is not needed. The server response time and
server load of interest can be used to calculate the mean response time and its variance.
Knowingthese,Risknown;andthechartsofFigures4aand4bcanbeusedas describedabove
to determine the probability that the response time will be less than some multiple of the service
timeataspecifiedload.
Note from Equations (6), R = 1 for exponential distributions independent of load, as mentioned
previously.
4
W. H. Highleyman, Chapter 4, Basic Performance Concepts, pp. 117-118, Performance Analysis of Transaction
ProcessingSystems,Prentice-Hall;1989.
6
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Summary
UsingtheGammadistribution,onecanreasonablyapproximatethedistributionofresponsetimes
for a given server load if the mean response time and its variance are known. These parameters
can be determined by physical measurement, or they can be calculated for certain service-time
distributions as shown in Equations (6) through (8). Using the Gamma distribution, one can then
determine the probabilitythat response times will be less than somemultiple of themean service
time. Alternatively, we can determine from the inverse Gamma function what response time will
notbeexceededwithagivenprobability.Theresults arewhatweneedtoknowinordertosatisfy
anSLA.
An Excel spreadsheet that is useful in making many of these response-time calculations can be
foundintheExcelworkbookat
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0403/composite_performance_sla.xls.
Thisworkbookincludesthespreadsheetscoveringthefirstthreepartsofthisseriesaswell.
If youhavenoreasonable waytodeterminethe varianceofthetransaction-responsetime,avery
conservative approach is to assume that the server has an exponential service time; and use a
valueofR=1(orusetheresultsofPart3).Thisistypicallytheworstcase.
In Part 5, our final part in this series, we introduce a very powerful feature of the Gamma
distribution to demonstrate how to use these results to calculate the SLA for a complex series of
servers.
7
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com