Google’s Extreme-Green Data Centers
December2008
Google has recently filed for a patent describing an all-green data center.1 No man-made energy
is used for powering the data center nor for cooling it. Rather, power is generated from the wave
motion of the ocean; and cooling is accomplished using seawater. Essentially, Google’s proposed
greendatacentersare bargesthathouse cargo container-sized serverfarms
The Explosion in Data Center Growth
Hundreds of millions of people now access the Internet daily. As a result, many information
providers are building massive data centers, each comprising thousands of servers and their
communicationandotherancillaryequipment.
Eachof thesedatacenters canimposeanextraordinaryloadonthelocalpower utilities.Notonly
is power needed to drive the thousands of servers, but additional power is needed to provide the
cooling required. The impact of this power load was felt in California a few years ago when
brown-outsbecameafrequentoccurrence.
Most of this energy is derived from fossil fuels and so contributes to our carbon footprint and
probablyto global warming. Therefore, there are many reasons to try to be more energy efficient
in our data centers, ranging from our limited power sources and high cost of energy to global
warmingandpollution.
A long-range solution is to build power networks from renewable energy such as wind, solar,
hydro,andevennuclearpower.However,asimportantasthesesolutionsare,theyaremassively
expensive and require sometimes decades to implement. Furthermore, they are effective only to
the extent that they can integrate with existing power grids, which themselves must be
significantly expanded. The result is that the location of new green energy and new data centers
mayhavenorelationtoeachother.
Google’s proposed solution is to collocate new data centers with cheap sources of energy –
mainlytheoceansoftheworld.
How Do We Tap the Oceans for Energy
There is a tremendous amount of free renewable energy that can be derived from the wave
motionof theoceans,and severaltechniques havebeenproposed anddevelopedto harvestthis
energy. Predominant among these is the PelamisWave EnergyConverter developed byPelamis
WavePower2ofScotland.
1J.Clidaras,D.Stiver,W.Hamburgen,Water-BasedDataCenter,U.S.PatentApplicationUS2008/0209234;August28,
2008.
2www.pelamiswave.com
1
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

ThePelamisWaveEnergyConverter
Currently, Pelamis Wave Energy Converters are in operation off the coasts of Scotland and
Portugal. The Portuguese installation is to be expanded to provide 21 megawatts of power,
enough to power about 15,000 Portuguese homes (see an explanatory video at
http://uk.youtube.com/watch?v=7k5r89IseEM.
The Pelamis Wave Energy Converter uses the motion of ocean surface waves to generate
electrical power. The Converter comprises connected cylindrical floats that flex and bend with
respecttoeachotheraswavespass.Itusesthismotiontogenerateelectricity.
smoothing hydraulic electric
accumulator motor generator
electric
power
hydraulic power
rams converter
units
floats
Pelamis WaveEnergyConverter
Each float is massive. It is 35 meters in length and 3.5 meters in diameter. Successive floats are
connected together via articulated hydraulic rams that drive high-pressure oil through hydraulic
motors as the rams are forced into and out of each float by the wave action. A float string is
typicallyanchoredin50to100metersofwaterfivetotenkilometersfromshore.
The oil pressure to the hydraulic motors is controlled by the use of smoothing hydraulic
accumulators, which are essentially pressure storage reservoirs.3 They store high oil pressure
and release consistent oil pressure to the hydraulic motors. This allows the hydraulic motors to
operate at constant speeds. The hydraulic motors drive electrical generators that can provide
powertotheGoogledatacenters.
This power is used not only to power the
servers in the data center but is also used to
power pumps that drive cool seawater
through heat exchangers to cool the servers.
The use of heat exchangers allows the
caustic seawater to be isolated from the
coolant circulating in the closed loop system
thatisusedtocoolthedatacenterservers.
A connection between a single pair of floats
(a Pelamis “machine”) can generate 750
kilowatts of power. Pelamis floats are
PelamismachinesoffthecoastofScotland
typically arranged as a set of four floats. The
three articulated joints connecting the four floats can generate up to 2.25 megawatts of power.
Forty Pelamis machines occupying about one square kilometer of ocean can generate about 30
megawattsofpower.
3HydraulicAccumulator,Wikipedia.
2
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Diesel backup generators are provided to provide power should the ocean turn glassyenough so
thatsufficientpowerisnotbeinggeneratedbythe Pelamismachines.Experiencehasshownthat
recoursetobackupdieselpowerisseldomneeded.
An alternative configuration is for some of the hydraulic motors to drive seawater pumps directly
ratherthanhavingthepumpsbeelectricallypowered.
An excellent video describing the Pelamis Wave Energy Converter can be found at
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mcTNkoyvLFs&feature=related. Many other impressive videos
maybefoundonwww.youtube.combysearchingonPelamis.
TetheredWaveEnergyConverter
An alternative method for generating electricity from wave motion uses a tethered floating
platform that rises and falls with wave action. A long tether is anchored to the ocean bottom on
one end and wraps around a spring-loaded drum on the other. As the platform rises, the tether
rotates the drum in one direction. As the platform falls, the spring-loaded drum rotates in the
oppositedirection,windinguptheslacktether.
spring-loaded
drumand
ratchetdrive
cooling
electric
water pump fly- fly- electric power
wheel wheel generator
float
wave
seawater motion
intake
tether
anchor
TetheredWaveEnergyConverter
The tether drum is connected to a shaft via a ratcheting mechanism so that the shaft is turned in
onlyonedirection.Flywheelsontheshaftandaspeedgovernor helpkeeptheshaftrotatingata
constant speed. The shaft can be used to drive an electrical generator to power the servers
and/orapumptosupplyseawaterforcooling.
OtherTechniques
Therearemanyothertechniquesthathavebeenproposedandimplementedinatleastprototype
form to convert wave energy to electrical energy. One example is the Wave Runner,4 developed
bythenowdefunctU.S.MyriadTechnologies intheearly1990s.Itis similar tothetetheredwave
machine described above except that it uses a gas or fluid-driven piston to drive electrical
generators.
4K.Welch,C.Rothi,H.Rothi,BuoyancyPumpPowerSystem,U.S.Patent7059123;July13,2006.
3
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Containerized Servers
One wayto package the large server farms required by the data center is in large rooms that are
actuallystandardcrane-moveableintermodalshippingcontainersusedbyocean-goingfreighters.
These containers can be 40 feet in length and are 8 feet in width and 9 ½ feet high, plenty of
room for asizeable server farm. Allports andconnectingroadandrailtransportationfacilities are
builttohandlethesecontainers.
In this way, standard rail or trucking facilities can be used to move the server containers from
their point of manufacture to an ocean port. There they can be loaded onto a floating server
platform that will become the data center. The server platform can, in fact, be an ocean freighter
configuredtohandlestandardshippingcontainers.
Theplatform contains thebackupbatteries and/or dieselgenerators requiredtoensurecontinued
power to the data center. Hydrogen fuel cells can be used for backup and can be recharged with
hydrogenbytheelectrolysisofseawaterwhenwaveenergyisavailable.
Once loaded, the freighter moves under its own power to the desired position in the open ocean
and anchors there. The freighter then connects to the wave-powered electrical grid. The
containerizedserversareconnectedtotheelectricalpowerandthecoolingfacilities.
All that is left is communication to the data center’s users. This can be done by connecting the
floating data center to the Internet backbone via microwave links or underwater fiber. Satellite
links can also be used for those applications that can tolerate the communication latency that is
imposed bysatellitecommunications.
servercontainers
electrical
Polamiswavemachine
coolant
Afloatingextreme-greendatacenter
Of course, the floating data centers must be kept out of shipping lanes to avoid collisions. They
mustalsobesuitablymarkedforvisibilityandbeshownonnavigationcharts.
Powering the Data Center
InGoogle’spreferredembodiment,thefloatingdatacenter willbepoweredbyPelamismachines.
Multiple such machines will be anchored in the vicinity of the data center. Their generated power
will be connected together in an electrical grid in such a way that the loss of a machine will have
noaffectonthepowergridexceptthatthemachine’spower-generatingcapacitywillbelost.
Pelamis machines typically comprise four floats connected together and anchored at their ends.
At float lengths of 35 meters each in length, this results in float configurations about 140 meters
4
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

long weighingover 300 tons.Theresultingthreemachines (oneper each float-pair interface) can
generateovertwomegawattsofpower.
Sufficientmachinesareprovidedtogeneratethepowerrequiredbythedatacenter.Forinstance,
ifsixtoeightmegawattsofpowerarerequired,foursetsoffourfloatswillsuffice.
polarmisgrid
anchor
servercontainers
points
Connectingtothewave-poweredelectricalgrid
Maintenance
Thefloatingdatacentersaredesignedwithmaintenanceinmind.Ifserversaretobeupgraded,a
maintenance ship with container-handling capabilities can be sent to the floating data center with
upgraded containerized servers. Old server containers can be offloaded at sea and the new
server containers put in place. Likewise, the data center can be expanded by adding additional
servercontainersand,ifneeded,additionalpower-generatingcapacity.
If a Pelamis machine malfunctions, it can be disconnected from the electrical grid and towed to
port. There it can be repaired, towed back, and returned to service. In the same way, Pelamis
machines can be upgraded. If additional capacity is needed, more Pelamis machines can be
towedtothedata-centersite,anchored,andconnectedtotheelectricalgrid.
Except for diesel power backup facilities, there is no ongoing energy expense. Perhaps equally
important is that additional power can be provided as the data center grows without having to
buildexpensivegeneratinganddistributioninfrastructure.
Infact,theremaynotevenbeaneedtogetgovernmentalapprovalforanyofthisconstruction.If
the data centers are far enough at sea, they will be in international waters and are subject to no
governmentalregulations.Thereisevenprecedenceforthis.Inthe1990s,anabandonedfloating
6,000 square-foot gunnery base in the North Sea became the tiny sovereign nation of Sealand.
Sealand provided a data haven for people who wanted to avoid governmental snooping or
regulation.5
Summary
The floating data centers envisioned by Google use free, non-polluting renewable energy – the
tremendous energy of oceanic wave action. The only time that this is not true is when backup
power is needed during those times in which there is not enough wave action to completely
powerthedatacenter.
5WelcometoSealand,Wired;July,2000.
5
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Google points out that the use of these floating data centers has other advantages. For instance,
during times of emergency following a hurricane, earthquake, or terrorist attack, such a data
center can be moved quickly to the vicinity of the disaster and can provide data-processing
servicestoreplacethosedestroyedordisabledbythedisaster.
A major focus of data-center design today is the minimization of energy footprints. Google’s
floatinggreendatacentersmaybeamajorstepinthisdirection.
6
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
