Protecting Big Data – Erasure Coding
November2015
Dr.TerryCritchley
ITConsultant
Dr.BillHighleyman
ManagingEditor,AvailabilityDigest
Big Data has changed the landscape of data storage. A company’s data is always
precious, and the loss of any of it can be devastating to the IT functions upon which the
company depends. With Big Data being stored on hundreds or even thousands of disks, how does one
protectthatdatafromloss?Erasurecodesaretheanswer.
Until recently, RAID storage satisfied most needs for data protection. RAID storage stripes data across
several disks with additional parity information so that should a disk fail, the
data the failed disk contained can be reconstructed on the fly from the data kilobyte 103bytes
and parity information on the surviving disks. RAID 6 even allows two disks
Megabyte 106bytes
to fail without losing any data. A typical RAID system stripes data across
fiveorsixdisks. Gigabyte 109bytes
Terabyte 1012bytes
RAID systems still can provide sufficient protection for hundreds of
terabytes of storage. However, with the advent of Big Data, the amount of Petabyte 1015bytes
storage required now far exceeds that possible with even the largest RAID Exabytes 1018bytes
systems. In many cases, the amount of Big Data storage required is
measured in exabytes – a million times greater than the capabilities of the Zettabyte 1021bytes
largest RAID systems. Big Data can require hundreds or even thousands of Yottabyte 1024bytes
disks for storage. In a storage system so large, even with the most reliable
Lottsabytes >1027bytes
disks industry has to offer, there almost always will be several disks in
failure.
Erasure Coding
When a disk fails, it is said to be erased. Similar to RAID, erasure coding provides forward error-
correcting codes on a set of additional disks. However, the error-recovery capabilities of erasure coding
are far more powerful than RAID. An erasure-coded system can be structured so that data recovery can
be achieved for any number of disk failures, a capability needed by the large number of disks in a Big
Datastoragesystem.
The core technology for erasure codes extends back over five decades. It has been in use in
communicationsystemsforthatlong,butisjustnowbeingappliedtostoragesystems.
Referring to Figure 1, the number of disks used to store data is denoted by k. An additional m disks are
provided for error-recovery coding. Thus, the total number of disks, n, is n = m + k. A measure of the
1
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

redundancy of the system is called the encoding rate, r, and is r = m/n. That is, r is the proportion of all
disksinthesystemdedicatedtoredundancy.Ifr=0,thereisnoredundancy.Insummary,
kisthenumberofdatadisks.
misthenumberoferror-recoverydisks.
nisthetotalnumberofdisks.
ristheencodingratem/n.
Erasure Coding Data Flow and Structure
Data
Erasure
CodingClient
Recovery
kdata mcoding
disks disks
n=k+m
Figure1:ErasureCodingDataFlowandDiskConfiguration
Thepoweroferasurecodingisthatthedatainthestoragesystemisavailableevenifmofthedisksin
thestoragesystemshouldfail.
How Does Erasure Coding Work?
The mathematics behind erasure coding is complex. However, as a simple statement, it depends upon a
polynomial relationship between the data of all of the disks. If a disk should fail, its data can be
reconstructedbysolvingthepolynomialforthemissingdatausingthedataofthesurvivingdisks.
A simple example is a parity check. In this case, there is one error disk (k = 1). The disk contains the
paritycheckforthesetofdatadisks.
.
As an example, consider four data disks and a table stored on these disks in which each row has four
fields, with one field contained on each data disk. The values for one particular row in this table are 3, 7,
2, 4. We define a parity value as being the negative of the sum of the data values. Thus, the parity value
is-16;andthesumofthedataandparityvaluesiszero.
Now let us assume that we lose disk 2 (the value of 7). We can reconstruct the value contained on that
diskbycombiningthevaluesonthesurvivingdiskswiththeparityvalue:
Missingvalue=16–3–2–4=7
Inthiscase,ourpolynomialistheone-dimensionalrelationship:
4
d d
0 i
i1
wherethedatavaluesared d ,d ,andd ,andtheparityvalueisd .
1, 2 3 4 0
2
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

A more interesting example is found in Wikipedia under “Erasure Code.” Though it is a communications-
oriented example, it suffices to show the next step – the use of a two-dimensional polynomial. The
exampleiscalled“err-mail.”
Err-mail works like e-mail except that about half of all mail gets lost, and messages longer than five
charactersareillegal.
Alicewantstosendhertelephonenumber,555629,toBob.Sinceshecanonlysenduptofivecharacters
ineachmessage,shebreakshertelephonenumberintotwopartsandsendsitas555followedby629.
However, she knows that there is a good chance that one or both messages will be lost. So, in concert
withBob,sheconstructsatwo-dimensionallinearpolynomialoftheform:
f(i)=a+(b–a)(i–1)
Settinga=555andb=629,shehasforhertelephonenumber
f(i)=555+74(i–1)
Thus,f(1)=555andf(2)=629.WewillcallthesemessagesAandB.
Alice also computes f(3) = 703 (message C), f(4) = 777 (message D), and f(5) = 851 (message E). She
sendsallfivemessagestoBob.
Bobreceives messages A,B,andC garbled butreceivesmessages D and Eproperly. Usingthe agreed-
uponpolynomialfunction,BobcansolveformessagesAandBandrecoverAlice’stelephonenumber:
777=a+3(b–a)
851=a+4(b–a)
Solving this pair of polynomials yields a = 555 and b = 629. Thus, Bob is able to recreate Alice’s
telephonenumbereventhoughthreeoutoffiveoftheerr-mailmessageswerelost.
Erasure coding extends this use of polynomials to multi-dimensional polynomials that can protect entire
disksandrecoverdataevenifmdisksarelost.
How Powerful is Erasure Coding?
Let us compare erasure coding to a common way to protect data – mirroring.With mirroring (also known
as RAID 1), the entire data set is duplicated. Thus, if any one disk is lost, the data is still available on its
mirror. In fact, data can be recovered in the event of multiple disk failures so long as both mirrors of a
singlediskarenotlost.
Mirroring
Let us take the case of eight data disks and eight coding disks. In the case of mirroring, the eight coding
disks are copies of the eight data disks. The number of ways that one disk can fail in one set of eight
disksandthesamediskcanfailintheothersetofeightdisksis8.
Letusassumethatthefailureprobabilityofadisk is10-3=.001.Itsavailability(theproportionoftimethat
it is up) is then .999, or three 9s (note that the number of nines of availability is equal to the exponent of
the failure probability). The probability that two disks will fail is (10-3)2 = 10-6. Since there are eight ways
thatdualdiskfailureswillresultindataloss,theprobabilitythatdatawillbelostis8*10-6:
probabilityofdatalossforthemirroredsystem=8*10-6
3
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

ErasureCoding
Now instead of mirroring, let us use erasure coding on eight data disks and eight coding disks. That
means that we can lose any eight disks in the storage subsystem and still not lose any data. In order to
losedata,wewillhavetoloseninedisks.
The number of ways that k disks out of n disks can fail is given bythe relationship for combinations (i.e.,
how many ways can k items be chosen from n items when the order of the k items doesn’t matter). The
numberofcombinationsofkitemsoutofnitemsis
n!
k!(nk)!
In our case, we want to know how many ways m+1 disks can fail out of n disks. This is what is required
fordataloss,andis
n!
(m1)!(nm1)!
Inourcaseexample,m=8andn=16.Thus,thenumberofwaysthatninesystemsoutofsixteencanfail
is
16!
=11,440
9!*7!
The probability that nine systems will fail is (.001)9= 10-27. There are 11,440 ways in which nine systems
out of sixteen can fail. Thus, the probability of data loss for the erasure coded system is 11,440*10-27 =
1.144*10-23:
probabilityofdatalossfortheexampleerasurecodedsystem=1.144*10-23
Thegeneralformforthisrelationshipis
n!
Probabilityofdatalossforanerasurecodedsystem= fm1
(m1)!(nm1)!
where
nisthetotalnumberofdisksinthestoragesubsystem
misthenumberofencodingdisks
fistheprobabilityoffailureofadisk
Comparisonof MirroringandErasureCoding
Based on the exponent of the failure probability, mirroring provides about six 9s of availability for this
example.Erasurecodingprovidesabouttwenty-three9sofavailability.Erasurecodingis1017timesmore
reliablethanmirroring(100quadrilliontimesmorereliable)!
Substantial reliability using erasure coding can be achieved in this case with many fewer coding disks.
For example, using only two coding disks instead of eight for a total of ten disks yields an availability of
aboutnine9s,athousandtimesmorereliablethanmirroringwithsixteendisks.
4
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Further References
An in-depth discussion of erasure codes and the mathematics behind them can be found in Dr. Terry
Critchley’s excellent book on high availability, “High Availability IT Services.” See the reference in the
Acknowledgementssectionbelow.
A major researcher in erasure codes is James Plank, a professor in the University of Tennessee’s
Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences Department. Papers presented by him can be found at
http://web.eecs.utk.edu/~plank/plank/papers/FAST-2013-Tutorial.html.
Panasas (www.panasas.com) is a company specializing in very large storage systems. It promotes the
use of erasure coding and notes that, with erasure coding, reliability can actually increase with scale.
Material from theblog of GeoffreyNoer, Vice Presidentof ProductManagementatPanasas, was used in
partforthisarticle.HisblogreferenceisgivenintheAcknowledgementssectionbelow.
Summary
Big Data presents a significant challenge for storage vendors. Data at the exabyte level may be spread
over hundreds or thousands of disks. At any point in time, many of these disks are liable to be out of
service. How does a company maintain access to its Big Data in the presence of continual multiple disk
failures?
The answer is erasure coding. By adding a set of coding disks that can be used to reconstruct data from
downed disks, extremely high reliabilities can be obtained at a moderate cost. Erasure coding provides
reliabilitiesthatareordersofmagnitudegreaterthanmoretraditionalmethodssuchasmirroringorRAID.
Acknowledgements
Informationforthisarticlewastakenfromthefollowingsources:
HighAvailabilityITServices,Dr.TerryCritchley,CRCPress;2015.
ErasureCodesforStorageSystems:ABriefPrimer,JamesS.Plank,Usenix;December2013.
https://www.usenix.org/system/files/login/articles/10_plank-online.pdf
The Increasing Need for High Reliability, High Performance Data Storage, Geoffrey Noer, Panasas Blog;
October27,2015.
ErasureCode,Wikipedia.
5
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com