– Our December Twitter Feed of Outages
December 2017
A challenge every issue for the Availability Digest is to determine which of the many
availability topics out there win coveted status as Digest articles. We always regret not
focusing our attention on the topics we bypass. With our new Twitter presence, we don’t
have to feel guilty. This article highlights some of the tweets that made headlines in
recent days.
Computer glitch giving American Airlines pilots Xmas holiday at once jeopardises
thousands of flights
Thousands of American Airlines' flights over the Christmas period have no pilots assigned to them
after a computer glitch gave time off to too many cockpit crew. The union for the pilots says that
possibly as many as 15,000 flights between 17 and 31 December will not have adequate crew
numbers.
https://t.co/bMZkO8nj5K
Obsolete, outdated software puts Victorian hospitals and police at risk of cyber attacks
Outdated computer systems are putting Victoria's (Australian state) most critical services (including
hospitals, police and child protection) at risk of cyber hackers and fraudsters. The obsolete IT
systems leave the state exposed to a disastrous hardware crash and computer virus attacks, the
Victorian Auditor-General's Office says. Audits also found that systems for criminal justice services,
marine safety and bushfire management are operating without key back-up capabilities
https://t.co/qUx56kqqr4
Human error causes Australian Broadcasting Corporation breach
Ukranian cybersecurity firm Kromtech discovered an unsecured cache of files related to the
commercial operations of the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, stored with Amazon Web
Services’ S3 ‘buckets’. The contents allegedly included several thousand emails, customer logins
and passwords, requests for licensed content, and 1,800 daily database backups made since
2015. The misconfigured repositories were left publicly visible, only discovered during a routine
check.
https://t.co/9nmjrsLh0Q
1
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Top-secret spy data exposed on misconfigured Amazon cloud instance
Top-secret data belonging to the United States Army Intelligence and Security Command, a joint
U.S. Army and National Security Agency Defense Department command that gathers intelligence
data, has been found exposed and open to the public. It was yet another case of a misconfigured
Amazon Web Services S3 storage instance and included more than 100 gigabytes of data.
https://t.co/3l2SZrFrlc
TalkTalk customers left without broadband after major 'outage'
Thousands of Talk Talk customers were left without broadband in November after the internet giant
suffered a "major outage.” Users in London, Birmingham, Manchester and Glasgow appeared to be
the worst affected, although problems also were reported elsewhere in the UK.
https://t.co/fzRKuKB9l4
Apple rushes to fix major password bug
A flaw in a recent version of MacOS High Sierra made it possible to gain entry to the machine
without a password and also to have access to powerful administrator rights. The bug was
discovered by Turkish developer Lemi Ergin. He found that by entering the username "root," leaving
the password field blank, and hitting "enter" a few times, he was granted unrestricted access to the
target machine.
https://t.co/UlZBkLPMnX
New IBM platform turns your data center into a cloud
What if you could flip a switch and turn your stodgy old data center full of legacy apps into a cloud-
enabled one capable of migrating apps and data to the public cloud with ease by containerizing your
legacy apps? IBM says it has just such an offering in IBM Cloud Private, a platform focused on
assisting private data centers looking for a relatively simple way to move into the cloud.
https://t.co/DUZ42qrLxK
How a Tiny Error Caused Internet Outages Across the US
A year ago. a DDoS attack caused internet outages around the US by targeting the internet-
infrastructure company Dyn, which provides Domain Name System services to look up web servers.
Recently, the US saw yet another nationwide series of outages but with a more pedestrian cause: a
misconfiguration at Level 3, an internet backbone company and enterprise ISP that underpins other
big networks. Network analysts say the misconfiguration was a routing issue that created a ripple
effect, causing problems for companies like Comcast, Spectrum, Verizon, Cox, and RCN.
https://t.co/v3qVNPNIws
2
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Google Cloud Spanner update includes SLA that promises less than five minutes of
downtime per
Cloud Spanner, Google’s globally distributed cloud database, got an update that includes multi-
region support, meaning the database can be replicated across regions for lower latency and better
performance. It also got an updated Service Level Agreement (SLA) that should please customers.
The latter states Cloud Spanner databases will have 99.999% (five nines) availability, a level of
downtime that translates into less than five minutes per year
https://t.co/yx5G4wV4ag
Report finds millions of insecure devices in European cities
Millions of unsecured smart-home gadgets are vulnerable to attack in European cities, according to
a recent report from computer security company Trend Micro. Berlin has more than 2.8 million
vulnerable devices, the largest number in a European city. London is a close second, with more than
2.5 million devices that could be attacked.
https://t.co/rD3kUBZQUp
Why the mainframe is still going strong
Mainframe technology has played a crucial role in the business world for decades. Yet as computing
technology has become more mobile over the years, many have predicted its downfall. Despite
these gloomy predictions, it still appears to be going strong. Indeed, mainframe technology has
evolved greatly in the five decades since it first appeared; and many organisations, including 70% of
Fortune 500 businesses, are still using mainframe systems to power core business operations.
https://t.co/HP7CzzQC9V
OVH to Disassemble Container Data Centers after Epic Outage in Europe
OVH, the quickly growing French cloud provider that’s been aggressively going after US market
share of giants like Amazon and Microsoft, is planning to shut down and disassemble two of the
three data centers on its campus in Strasbourg, France, following a power outage that brought down
the entire campus in November. The outage lasted throughout the day and well into the evening and
caused prolonged disruption to customer applications.
https://t.co/AMO7mrcPqM
"Hacking the Lights Out"
It recently was reported that North Korea is exploring ways to penetrate the U.S. electrical grid –
most likely to position the country to launch a preemptive or retaliatory cyber-attack. An article
available at www.securityinfowatch.com/12374400 describes a spear phishing attack that used fake
fundraiser invitations containing malware. The story suggests that this was the first such attempt by
the North Koreans, although this technique has been used previously by Russian hackers. As a
refresher, spear phishing is the fraudulent practice of sending emails ostensibly from a known or
trusted sender in order to induce targeted individuals to reveal confidential information.
https://t.co/656SHEKYGQ
3
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Space missions that dodged disaster
A tiny problem can have huge consequences for a space mission. Sometimes a huge endeavor
hinges on the smallest detail — three seconds’ worth of fuel, an engineer’s stubbornness, a speck of
paint, or a 1.3-millimeter calibration. When surprise glitches revealed themselves after launch, it took
massive efforts to save the missions that gave us a closer look at Mercury, a tour of the outer solar
system, our only glimpse of Titan’s surface, and an incredible view of the early universe. But even
with hundreds of people putting in months of work, a few of these missions only succeeded by a
razor-thin margin.
https://t.co/iBrNsRAIzV
Snapchat had an outage yesterday, and the grown-up Internet didn't notice:
Snapchat was down for four hours on a Monday in November, apparently preventing users from
signing into the app. The outage, which began at around 3:30 p.m., prompted teens and junior
millennials to express their panicked chagrin on Twitter. Gen X was conspicuously absent from the
brouhaha. It seems that everyone else—i.e., grownups—only found out about the outage from news
reports the day after it happened, another brutal reminder that we drift further and further from the
digital vogue as we age.
https://t.co/AbhRymaVOR
4
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Google’s Halloween lock-out caused by false positive
Who is in charge of files created and stored on Google Docs and Drive? Most people assume it’s the
user or team sharing them. But an incident affecting these services on Halloween reminded
everyone that there is always a super user with absolute power sitting above this – Google itself.
On that particular day, some Docs users started finding themselves blocked from opening or editing
specific documents. Many reported seeing the following message: This item has been flagged as
inappropriate and can no longer be shared. Except the files were wholly innocent of the charge,
something that was quickly pointed out to Google using the preferred medium of modern complaint,
Twitter. A few hours later, access to the files was restored. All back to normal? Not exactly.
https://t.co/oP2hiivxiz
'$300m in cryptocurrency' accidentally lost forever due to bug
More than $300m of cryptocurrency was lost after a series of bugs in a popular digital wallet service
led one curious developer to accidentally take control of and then lock up the funds, according to
reports. Unlike most cryptocurrency hacks, however, the money wasn’t deliberately taken: it was
effectively destroyed by accident.
https://t.co/M7BKOybetR
Comcast's nationwide outage was caused by a configuration error
In early November, folks across the U.S. reported that Comcast Internet services were down -- an
unusually large outage that lasted around 90 minutes. It turns out that the problem was caused by
Level 3, an enterprise ISP that provides the backbone for other internet providers like Verizon,
Comcast and RCN. The outage shows yet again just how vulnerable the Internet is.
https://t.co/QmkBP6lMGg
IT infrastructure failing as if the past two decades never happened
In Greek mythology, King Sisyphus was an arrogant ruler who believed he was smarter than Zeus.
As punishment for his hubris, Sisyphus was tasked with pushing a boulder up a hill in the
underworld, only to have it spin out of his control and roll back down. Based on recent data centre
downtime events, we can only describe the process of keeping IT infrastructure running as
Sisyphean. Data centre owners and operators repeatedly watch as the boulder slips from their grasp
and back down the hill.
https://t.co/ckN93apBtM
Loss of Hewlett-Packard Archive a Wake-Up Call for Computer Historians
Some 100 boxes of correspondence, speeches, and other documents created by William Hewlett
and David Packard as they built the company considered to be the grandfather of what we think of
as Silicon Valley were burned to ash by the recent Sonoma County fires.
https://t.co/hVHRSh3R7K
5
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

The big opportunities in serverless computing
Serverless computing is a type of cloud service where the hosting provider allocates adequate
resources for you on the fly rather than making you pay for dedicated servers or capacity in
advance. It’s a major technological breakthrough, and we expect to see a significant inflection point
soon in this nascent market.
http://bit.ly/2yHpkDo
A new Dummies book: Beginners Guide to Hyperconverged Infrastructure
Powerful IT doesn’t have to be complicated. Hyperconvergence puts your entire virtualized
infrastructure and advanced data services into one integrated powerhouse. This easy-to-understand
guide will help you a) understand the basic tenets of hyperconvergence and the software-defined
data center and b) solve for common virtualization roadblocks.
https://t.co/NApDyUXDv0
The incredible shrinking operating system: Containers and serverless computing are
changing the cloud
For years, Microsoft and Linux vendors have fought for control of the operating system, this basic
and lucrative part of “the stack.” But as cloud computing evolves, we’re starting to see other parts of
the stack take on greater prominence. Containers — which allow applications to run independently
of the operating system — were the spark for this evolution; and the growing importance of container
orchestration software means that a certain amount of the resource management once done by the
operating system can now be handled in other places.
https://t.co/RHEYVuJZDd
What Are Azure Availability Zones?
An Azure region is made up of several data centers. Each data center, or group of data centers, has
its own resources such as power and networking. Each set of independent data centers, or group of
data centers, that does not share resources with others is called an availability zone.
https://t.co/e0AGqDqRRC
Time to Update Your Vacuum Cleaner -- Hack Turns LG Robot Hoover Into A Spy
Got a robot hoover buzzing around your home? It's time to take a look at its security, especially if it’s
an LG device. Researchers from Israeli firm Check Point reported a hack of the LG SmartThinQ app
