The Zero Outage Industry Standard Association
February 2017
The Zero Outage Industry Standard Association (ZOISA) (https://www.zero-
outage.com) is focused on minimizing the risk of users suffering from IT
outages. It is creating IT standards that will help users to confidently make use
of systems and services that are less likely to be affected by crashes and outages. As one who
deals extensively with highly available systems, it is clear to me that a standards organization that
deals in reducing outages is sorely needed by the industry. However, I am not sure that this
association is going to achieve its goals. At least so far, its outlook is much too generic.
Launched in November, 2016, the association is headquartered in London, United Kingdom. Its
founding members include Brocade, Cisco, Dell EMC, Hitachi Data Systems, Hewlett-Packard
Enterprise, Juniper, NetApp, SAP, SUSE, T-Systems, and IBM. There are many other large
organizations with a stake in IT availability, and I wonder why they are not cooperating in ZOISA.
Zero Outage is currently in the process of defining what is required to achieve a zero-outage IT
environment. IT failures can result from technical defect, human error, or flawed, inconsistent, or
ineffective organizational processes. ZOISA seeks to standardize the quality of IT platforms,
people, processes and security throughout the IT life cycle.
ZOISA’s zero outage industry standards reflect several parallel trends:
The ongoing digitalization of the enterprise.
The growing importance to businesses of being able to maintain uninterruptible services
to their customers.
The real cost to businesses caused by service interruptions and outages.
The desire among industry manufacturers to find new commercial opportunities and ways
of boosting productivity in an increasingly competitive marketplace.
ZOISA
As ZOISA points out,
“Digitization is in full swing: Machines communicate with each other, processes are
becoming more efficient, and automation is an integral part of the process. But this can
only work if the IT behind it runs smoothly. A failure, even for a few minutes, can have
fatal consequences. If production bands are stopped due to IT problems, companies are
threatened with image losses and costs of millions.”
The digital world is increasingly dependent on IT. A technical defect, human error, or erroneous
process execution can be a threat to a company’s everyday operations. In order to enable highly
stable operations, companies need to be able to control the quality of platforms, people,
processes, and security throughout the entire supply chain. ZOISA intends to specify consistent
error response times, employee qualification levels, and asset security and platform requirements
in order to help companies minimize errors, increase availability, ensure security, and operate
cost-effectively.
1

ZOISA is providing a Zero Outage framework of best practices and standards to enable the
delivery of secure, reliable, and highly available end-to-end services and solutions. The goal is to
develop a common standard for IT processes, platforms, people, and security to safeguard
quality and reliability at all levels and to maximize the availability and customer satisfaction with IT
services by improving stability and security.
ZOISA intends to focus on:
• Establishing consistent error response times.
• Improving security and platform guidelines.
• Specifying training and qualification requirements for IT personnel.
From my own personal experience in dealing with highly available systems, I think that ZOISA
should focus on additional items such as:
• The quality of devices in redundant systems.
• The proper architecture of redundant systems.
• Proper failover procedures.
• Failover testing (often not done or done only partially by organizations).
• The frequency of failover testing (many organizations rely on faith and hope rather than
on proper testing).
Stephan Kasulke, senior vice-president of global quality at IT service provider T-Systems, is the
chairman of ZOISA. He stated:
“As an organization’s IT infrastructure can involve a complex ecosystem of technologies
from a variety of vendors, there are often differing levels of service-level agreements in
place which can lead to critical defaults and security issues.”
ZOISA’s IT standards will help to standardize the requirements of SLAs from different vendors.
Zero Outage Design Principles
ZOISA’s focus is on existing technologies, not new technologies. In order to create a Zero Outage
framework, it is important to establish agreement on what Zero Outage Design Principles mean.
This has been the initial focus of ZOISA. ZOISA’s current positions on this topic are as follows:
What do Zero Outage Design Principles mean?
ZOISA must describe the necessary combination of features and services in conjunction with IT-
elements in order to contribute to a Zero Outage service. These include the Zero Outage Design
Principles needed in order to achieve the ZOISA standard. For instance, principles will be
compiled for becoming a Zero Outage cloud environment.
Two varying perspectives on Zero Outage Design Principles
Two types of Zero Outage Design Principles exist:
• General Zero Outage Design Principles that suit all IT-elements, such as the high
availability of power supplies.
• Specific Zero Outage Design Principles for specific IT elements, such as LAN storage
devices.
2

Zero Outage Design Principle Phases
Within each Zero Outage Design Principle, there are three phases:
The Plan Phase:
During the Plan phase, Zero Outage requirements that are to be met by all
platforms, such as redundant design, are established. A Validation Plan to
ensure that these requirements are met is prepared.
The Build Phase:
The Build Phase follows a deployment plan that must be prepared. Proper tests
at the end of the deployment are specified to ensure that the introduction to
service has been correct. Support is provided for a period after the Build Phase
to ensure that systems continue to operate properly. (It is here that the failover
procedures should be specified and tested.)
The Run Phase:
The Run Phase includes normal life-cycle management activities, such as
update, change, and patch management.
Design Principles for the Run Phase
It is during the Run Phase that test procedures can be provided to certify compliance with
the Zero Outage Design Principles. Zero Outage Design Principles include:
Zero Outage Design Principles for IT Elements:
Redundant power supplies and interfaces with battery back-ups
Non-disruptive upgrades, patches, and changes
A health-check procedure for providing system status
Online replacements without disruption
Redundant cable paths, virtual paths, and drive paths
Redundancy and resiliency checks
Absence of single point of failures in the architecture
Failover procedures and tests
Zero Outage Design Principles for Storage Devices:
Online procedures for hardware replacement
Up and down capacity scaling
Online implementation of updates, patches, and changes
Check procedure for missing data replication or backup
Securing traceable purging data from replaced disks
Zero Outage Design Principles for Network Elements:
Redundant routing engines
Redundant cards and ports
Redundant links
Geo-redundancy via WAN
In-building redundancy (e.g., fire protection)
Summary
The Zero Outage Industry Standards Association is a work in progress. The major companies
involved have been active in ZOISA only for a few months as of this writing. At this point, they are
still in the process of defining Zero Outage Design Principles. However, the goal of ZOISA is
3

impressive. If it can produce reasonable standards for zero outage IT systems, businesses and
consumers will have scored a major win against the costs and inconvenience of IT failures.
Acknowledgements
Information for this article was taken from the following sources:
Tech Giants Collaborate on Zero Outage to Define New Industry Standard, T-Systems press
release; November 6, 2016.
Establishing a Zero Outage Standard is About Technology, People, and Processes, Chris Drake
Blog; November 22, 2016.
Tech industry big guns unite to create crash-free IT services and systems, Web Market Shop;
December 13, 2016.
Tech industry big guns unite to create crash-free IT services and systems, Computer Weekly;
December 13, 2016.
Zero Outage Design Principles, ZOISA; undated.
ZOISA Web Site (https://www.zero-outage.com)
4