VSI Releases First New Version of OpenVMS
June2015
VMS Software, Inc. (VSI) has just released its first version of an upgraded OpenVMS
operating system under its agreement reached with HP a year ago. It is an extension of
HP’s final OpenVMS release, version 8.4, with upgrades and bug fixes. VSI’s release is version 8.4-1H1
and is dubbed “Bolton” after the VSI headquarters location in Bolton, Massachusetts, USA. Bolton is
compatible with HP Integrity i2 servers based on the Intel Itanium 9300 processor and HP Integrity i4
serversbasedontheIntelItanium9500processor.
VMS Software, Inc.
In June, 2013, HP’s roadmap showed that OpenVMS software, its popular and ultra reliable operating
system, would be supported until 2020 with mature product support (no new patches) continuing through
2025.Supportforsomeversionswouldendin2015.
With thousands of major applications upon which many enterprises rely running on OpenVMS, there
resulted a worldwide outpouring of anguish from companies that simply could not replace their mission-
critical applications. In response, HP made a U-turn and executed an exclusive license with VSI for
perpetualdevelopmentofOpenVMS.
From where did VSI originate? VSI was created exclusively to carry on
OpenVMS development and support.1 It was formed in May, 2014, by a group of
investors, executives, and developers from Nemonix, a company that had
provided OpenVMS services for older VAX and Alpha systems for three decades. VSI temporarily
launched from the Nemonix facility in Northborough, Massachusetts, for a couple of months, before
movingtoitspermanentofficespaceanddatacenterinBolton,Massachusetts.
The Crunch to Get Out the First New Release
With critical eyes watching them, VSI felt it imperative to demonstrate rapid progress. It set a goal of
releasingitsfirstupgradedversionofOpenVMSwithinayear.
In myconversation with Duane Harris, CEO of VSI, it became clear that the one-year goal was daunting.
AccordingtoHarris,theproblem was notsomuchthe softwaredevelopment–withhis thirtyexperienced
OpenVMS developers, that was an orderly project. The challenge was getting the infrastructure
establishedtosupportthesoftwaredevelopmentteam.
Thefirststeps weregetting HPtodeliver theOpenVMSsourcecodeandprovide thesystems requiredto
develop and test on. VSI acquired multiple racks-worth of development and quality control servers from
1OpenVMSSupportToContinueIndefinitely,AvailabilityDigest;August2014.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0908/openvms.pdf
1
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

HP Integrity servers with Itanium 9500 and 9300 blades/rack-mount servers to AlphaServers rack-mount
servers, plus storage arrays and networking gear. HP’s development team in India sent VSI the
OpenVMSsourcecode.Thetapes weredeliveredinSeptemberbeforeVSIhadevencompleteditsmove
intoitsnewheadquarters.Unfortunately,thetapes weresenttoHarris’home.Hereturnedoneeveningto
findmillionsofdollars’worthofsourcecodesittinginhisdriveway.
The software systems then had to be built, and third-party components had to be installed and tested. At
this point, the development and testing of the new OpenVMS version could proceed. Through
extraordinary efforts by both VSI and HP personnel, VSI completed the golden master of OpenVMS 8.4-
1H1 two days ahead of the scheduled deadline for delivery to VSI’s resellers. VSI announced worldwide
availabilityonJune1,2015.
What’s Next?
VSI is aggressively extending its development staff to meet future commitments. It plans to double the
numberofdevelopersbytheendof2015andtohave100developersonstaffbytheendof2016.
Itscurrentroadmapbegins withplansfortwomoreOpenVMSItanium releasesinthenextcoupleof year.
Included will be upgrades such as a new file system, performance enhancements, upgraded device
drivers,andTCP/IPnetworkingimprovements.
The company is currently working on support for HP’s new Poulson Itanium blades, and it is in
conversation with HP to extend support to HP’s future Kittson blades when they become available. It
hopes to get Kittson blades early enough so that it can release its Kittson version of OpenVMS when HP
firstmakesKittsonsystemsgenerallyavailable.
VSI’s big move is to port OpenVMS to 64 bit x86 blades and servers from HP and other vendors. With a
50% performance improvement over Itanium blades and a lower price point, x86 blades will significantly
improve the price/performance of OpenVMS. Furthermore, VSI’s x86 version will potentially support the
high-speed InfiniBand backbone network fabric, making it easier for OpenVMS applications to integrate
with applications running on other x86-based operating systems such as Linux. The company’s current
goalistodeliveranx86versionofOpenVMSin2018.
TheVSIx86versionofOpenVMSwillbeabletooperateasavirtualmachineundertheopen-sourceRed
Hat KVM (Kernel-based Virtual Machine) hypervisor, which runs on a Linux host. VSI hopes to have this
capability about the time that it releases the x86 version of OpenVMS. In the future, VSI plans to extend
OpenVMSvirtualizationtotheVMwarehypervisor.
Duane Harris noted that “In less than 12 months, we have not only assembled a strong team of
OpenVMS developers and customer support personnel, but we have also developed a roadmap with an
aggressiveschedulethatincludessupportfornewplatforms,features,andtechnologies.”
Portability
VSI is focused on making it easy for customers to upgrade to its later versions of OpenVMS. Its just-
released version is binary compatible with several earlier HP versions, including versions 8.4, 8.3-1H1,
8.3,and8.2-1.Therefore,applicationscanbemovedfrom theseearlier versionstoVSI’sversion8.4-1H1
withnorecompilingorrelinking.VSIalsoexpectstoprovidethiscapabilityforitsx86version.
As a further aid to upgrading from older systems, VSI is developing binary translators to port VAX and
Alpha applications to its x86 OpenVMS version. This is important because the source codes for many of
theseoldapplicationsnolongerexist,sotheycannotberecompiled.
2
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Licensing and Support
According to the agreement between VSI and HP, customers can purchase licenses for VSI versions of
OpenVMS either from VSI or HP and at the same price. The licensing terms are the same and are
equivalent to current licensing provisions. The operating system is licensed on a per-socket basis, and
compilersarelicensedperconcurrentuser.
If a license is purchased from HP, HP will provide level 1 and level 2 support. However, VSI will provide
level 3 support (bug fixes). If a license is purchased from VSI, VSI will provide level 1 through level 3
support.
The HP versions 8.4 and earlier must be purchased from HP, and HP will provide all services for these
versions. However, when HP drops support for a version, VSI may take it over. Currently, VSI may
supportallpriorversionsnotsupportedbyHP,includingAlphaversionsbutnotVAXversions.
Training
As of February 1, 2015, VSI is offering OpenVMS training for all versions. A list of VSI training classes
canbefoundathttps://vmssoftware.com/training/tr_crs.html.
OpenVMS Boot Camp 2015
In previous years, the OpenVMS community, in cooperation with Connect, the Independent HP Business
Technology Community User Group, ran the OpenVMS Boot Camp. VSI is continuing this tradition. The
2015 OpenVMS Boot Camp takes place from September 27th through September 30th. The Boot Camp
provides four days of technical content and peer-to-peer networking. It will be held at the Radisson
Nashua Hotel in Nashua, New Hampshire. The Boot Camp will include a Partner Pavilion and a Partner
Roundhouse.
Summary
AccordingtoDuaneHarris,VSIisnotfocusingcurrentlyonsellingnewlicensesforOpenVMS.Itismainly
selling upgrades to the existing customer base because there is only a limited market for new Itanium
systems.
However, this will change dramatically when OpenVMS becomes available on HP’s x86 blades. With a
significantly improved price/performance point and the move to commoditytechnology, the expectation is
that the market for new OpenVMS systems will open up. Thanks to VSI, OpenVMS is alive and well and
willbeaforcefortheforeseeablefuture.
As stated by Randy Meyer, vice president and general manager, Mission Critical Solutions, HP Servers,
“Mission-critical customers face ever-increasing demands for security, stability, and uptime performance
for their critical applications. With the VSI OpenVMS Bolton release and its extended development
roadmap, customers will have even more flexibilityto choose the OpenVMS platform that is right for their
business.”
3
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com