Mt. Gox, Largest Bitcoin Exchange, Goes Belly Up
March2014
What an investment! If you had purchased $1,000 of bitcoins in early 2011, they would be
worth $2,000,000 now – a 2,000:1 increase in value. During this period, bitcoins appreciated
from $0.30 to $600 USD each (with a peak price breaking $1,000). You would have made a bundle - if
youdidn’tloseittohackers,thatis.
That is what happened to thousands of bitcoin investors when the world’s largest bitcoin exchange, Mt.
Gox, lost almost all of its bitcoins. As it filed for bankruptcy in Japan and then in the U.S. in February,
2014, Mt. Gox admitted that hackers stole over a period of years 755,000 bitcoins that it was storing
digitally for its customers and another 100,000 bitcoins that it owned. At the going price of $600, this
amountstoatheftofover$500millionUSD.
What’s a Bitcoin?
Abitcoinis adigitalcurrency. Youhold yourbitcoins in yourbitcoinwallet.Youcanusethem to
buyandsellmerchandise,youcanholdthem forinvestment,or youcanconvertthem toahard
currency. There are no physical bitcoins (except for souvenirs or as a physical means to hold
thedigitalsignatureofyourbitcoinwallet).
TheIntroductionofBitcoins
Bitcoins were introduced in 2009. They are basically a cryptographic currency in which public-key
encryption is used to transfer bitcoins from a buyer to a seller in a bitcoin transaction. In effect, if the
encryption keys are thought of as a bitcoin address, a bitcoin transaction transfers ownership of some
bitcoinsfromonebitcoinaddresstoanotherbitcoinaddress.
Abuyersendsatransactiontoasellerencryptedwiththepublickeyoftheseller.Thesellerthenuseshis
private key to decrypt the transaction and to accept the funds. All transactions are recorded in a central
bitcoin ledger called a Blockchain. The Blockchain contains every bitcoin transaction that was ever
executed
Bitcoins are an unregulated currency, and all transactions are anonymous. Buyers and sellers cannot be
tracked – they are known only by their bitcoin addresses. However, this allows bitcoins to be used for
illegalpurposes(suchasdrugdealing),formoneylaundering,andforevadingsalestaxes.
GeneratingNewBitcoins
Bitcoins are created via a process known as mining. A miner is a bitcoin transaction processor. As a
miner accumulates a block of transactions of predefined size, he adds the block to the bitcoin Blockchain
(the bitcoin general ledger) via a compute-intensive and highly complex procedure. For this, he receives
25bitcoins.Allbitcoinsincirculationaretheresultofminingfees.Thisistheonlywaythatbitcoinscanbe
1
©2014SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

produced.Thereis nosuch thingas acountryprinting moremoneyas its needs increase,thus leadingto
inflation.
In 2017, the 25-bitcoin block reward will be cut in half. Every four years after that, it will be cut in half
again.In2040,thebitcoinrewardwillbeterminatedandtherewillbenomorebitcoinscreated.
There currently are about 12 million bitcoins in circulation with a value of about $7 billion USD. The
ultimatebitcoinlimitin2040isestimatedtobeabout21millionbitcoins.
BitcoinWallets
All bitcoins are stashed in wallets. A wallet is where a bitcoin owner stores his bitcoins and sends and
receivesthemtootherbitcoinholders.Awalletisidentifiedtoallbitcoinholdersbyitspublickey.
There are several types of wallets. From an overview standpoint, there are web wallets and local
wallets. A web wallet is like having an account with a third party (such as a bank with normal hard
currency) that holds your bitcoins and arranges transfers. A local wallet is like storing your funds in
yourownsafe.
Walletsincludethefollowingtypes:
DesktopWallets
Desktop wallets are the most private, as they store your bitcoins on your own computer. However, that
alsomeansthatyouhavetodownloadtheBlockchainandupdateitwitheverytransactionyoumake.The
Blockchain is currently about 8 gigabytes, but it is growing without bound as time goes on since it
contains every bitcoin transaction since bitcoins were first introduced. Fortunately, there are third-party
appsthatallowyoutoaddtransactionstotheBlockchainwithouthavingtodownloadtheentirechain.
WebWallets
Webwallets are centralizedthird-partyservices thathold your bitcoin information sothat you do not have
to deal with the Blockchain. In effect, they hold your bitcoins and arrange your transfers. They then add
your transactions to the Blockchain. Because your bitcoins are being held by a third party, web wallets
arelesssecurethandesktopwallets.
MobileWallets
Mobilewalletsallow youtobringbitcoins with youin yourpocket.Youcanexchangecoinseasilyandpay
in physical stores by scanning a QR code. As with web wallets, they use a third-party provider to hold
your bitcoins, make your transactions, and add them to the Blockchain. Mobile wallets are also less
securethandesktopwalletsforthesamereasonsthatwebwalletsarelesssecure.
BitcoinExchanges
The third parties that hold bitcoins for web and mobile wallets are by and large bitcoin exchanges. There
are dozens of bitcoin exchanges around the world (https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Buying_bitcoins) and you can
usetheexchangeofyourchoice.
In addition to managing bitcoin transactions, bitcoin exchanges often will allow you to buy bitcoins from
theirtreasuryortosellbitcoinstothem,thusconvertingbetweenyourbitcoinsandhardcurrency.
As with stock exchanges, bitcoin exchanges establish the current value of bitcoins via a bid/ask process.
Buyersbidforbitcoinsatspecifiedprices,andsellers askforspecifiedprices.Wherethetwainshallmeet
isthecurrentpriceforbitcoins.
2
©2014SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Mt. Gox
ItsFounding
Mt.Gox is aTokyo-based bitcoinexchange.It was launched in 2010. By2013, it had becomethe world’s
largestbitcoinexchangebytransactionvolume,handling70%ofallbitcointransactionsworldwide.
ItsHacking
Sometime in 2013, Mt. Gox customers started to note that withdrawals of bitcoins were taking longer and
longer. By November, customers were experiencing delays of weeks to months for withdrawing funds.
CoinDesk,abitcoinmonitoringservice,foundviaaFebruarypollthat68%ofMt.Goxcustomerswerestill
awaitingfundsfromMt.Gox.
On February 7, 2014, Mt. Gox abruptly halted all withdrawals of bitcoins. In a published note, Mt. Gox
stated”
“A bug in the bitcoin software makes it possible for someone to use the Bitcoin network to alter
transaction details to makeit seem like a sending of bitcoins to a bitcoin wallet did not occur when in
fact it did occur. Since the transaction appears as if it has not proceeded correctly, the bitcoins may
be resent. MtGox is working with the Bitcoin core development team and others to mitigate this
issue.”
This was the first sign that Mt. Gox had been hacked. A few days later, an unidentified hacker posted a
block of malware code that provided redirection of bitcoin transactions. The hacker noted that Mt. Gox’s
node IP address is hard-encoded in the server code, as are the SSH keys used to connect to Mt.
Gox’s transaction processing server. Anyone who had access to the server running this code could
haveeasilyredirectedtransactions.
On February 24th. Mt. Gox suspended trading and shut down its web site. It announced that it had
lost about 750,000 customer bitcoins and 100,000 of its own bitcoins. This represents about 6% of
allbitcoinsinexistence.
3
©2014SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

According to leaked information from the company, the theft had been occurring over several years
by using the bug in the bitcoin software that allowed a transaction to be repeated multiple times.
Evidently,Mt.Gox’sauditing procedureswereinadequate topickupearlyonwhatshould have been
anobviousdiscrepancy.Theresultisthathundredsofmillionsofdollarsinbitcoinswerestolen.
ItsDemise
On February 28th, Mt, Gox filed for the equivalent of bankruptcy in Japan. It followed this up with a U.S.
bankruptcyfiling.
Mt. Gox is now closed down. Unfortunately, bitcoins held by it on its customers’ behalf are gone.
Customershavenorecourse,thoughsomeclass-actionsuitshavebeenfiled.
Bitcoins - a Currency or a Commodity?
There are two classes of bitcoin holders – those using bitcoins as a currency for purchasing items and
thoseholdingthemasacommodityforinvestmentpurposes.
Depending upon with whom you talk, the future for bitcoins remains either bright or dismal. There are
severalissuestoconsider.
Liquidity
In order for bitcoins to be a useful currency, they must be distributed among a major portion of the
population. This is currently a major issue. Though it is estimated that millions of people hold bitcoins,
recent data suggests that about fifty people hold almost a third of all bitcoins. Half of all bitcoins are held
by less than 1,000 people. Major holders of bitcoins are most likely holding them for investment rather
thanwiththeintentionofusingthemtopurchasegoods.
Volatility
The price of bitcoins has been highly volatile. In early 2011, bitcoins were selling for $0.30 USD. They
suddenlyroseto$32,andthenpromptlycrashedbackto$2.
Inearly2013,bitcoinsreachedapeakof$266,andthenplummetedto$50.
4
©2014SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

InNovember,2013,the priceof abitcoin soared to over $1,000 USD. InJanuary, 2014,its price dropped
to $500 and then rebounded to $900. After Mt. Gox reported its problems in early 2014, the bitcoin price
droppedto$400.Bitcoinsarenowsellingforabout$600.
Volatilitysuch as this attracts investors.However,itmakes itdifficultfor consumers tobuybitcoins andto
use them for product purchases. You might buysome bitcoins todayat $600 and find that they are worth
only$400 when youlater attempttousethem forapurchase.Ofcourse,theyalsomayhaveappreciated
bythetimeyouwanttousethem.
Currency
In order to be a viable currency, merchants must be willing to accept bitcoins. Currently, about 1,000
brick-and-mortarstoresacceptbitcoinsasdoabout35,000onlinemerchants.
Merchants are incentivized to accept bitcoins because the bitcoin transaction fee is much less than the
fee charged by credit card companies. In addition, since transactions are anonymous, there is no
chargeback problem.Acustomercannotdisputeapurchaserequiringthemerchanttorefundthebitcoins
becausethecustomercannotprovetowhomthebitcoinswerepaid.
However, as mentioned above, bitcoins will probably not take off as a currency until its price stabilizes.
There are currently about 80,000 bitcoin transactions per day. This is paltry compared to Visa’s 2,000
transactionspersecond.
Commodity
The wild mecca of volatility is what makes bitcoins of such interest to investors. They can buy and sell
bitcoinsonexchangesjustlikeanyothercommoditysuchasstocks,takingadvantageofthehugeswings
in prices. There are even some exchanges that allow an investor to short bitcoins (selling bitcoins that he
doesn’townbyborrowingbitcoinsfromtheexchange).
In part, it is the lack of liquidity that contributes to volatility. If an investor wants to buy bitcoins, there are
not that manysellers and he is forced as a result to pay a higher price. If he is a seller, there are not that
manybuyersandhewillhavetosellforalowerprice.
Summary
The key to making bitcoins a viable currency is to increase their liquidity. Bitcoins must distributed into
manymore hands and be much more evenly distributed. Until the liquidity problem is solved, the price of
bitcoins will be highly volatile; and bitcoins will remain more of a commodity to be traded by investors
ratherthanasacurrencytopurchasegoods.
Another aspect of bitcoins is the fact that the bitcoin currency is unregulated. In most countries, bitcoins
do not fall within the definition of a currency. This provides the advantage of anonymity, which is seen as
a positive factor by many. Unfortunately, anonymity serves to protect the illegal use of bitcoins for
activitiessuchasmoneylaundering,drugdealing,andterrorismfunding.
The downside of no regulation is that there is no protection for the bitcoin holders. For instance, if a
bitcoin exchange like Mt. Gox fails, there is no insurance to protect the bitcoin holders. In fact, a bitcoin
exchangecancontinuetooperateevenifitisinsolvent,asMt.Goxevidentlydidfor years.Arecentstudy
hasshownthe45%ofbitcoinexchangeshavefailedandhavetakentheirclients’bitcoinswiththem.
However, the regulation landscape is changing. For instance, buying goods with any virtual currency is
now illegal in China. Also, some countries are moving to require that the identity of buyers and sellers of
bitcoinsbeavailabletogovernmentauthorities.
5
©2014SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Acknowledgements
Informationforthisarticlewastakenfromthefollowingsources:
Bitcoin’s Price Plummets As Mt. Gox Goes Dark, With Massive Hack Rumored, Forbes; February 25,
2014.
MtGox code posted by hackers as company files for bankruptcy protection, ARS Technica; March 3,
2014.
MtGox “fraud evidence” hacked and published, complete with Bitcoin wallet-stealing malware,
Gigaom;March10,2014.
Whybitcoinisn’tdeadyet, CBC;March10,2014.
Bitcoin,Wikipedia.
MtGox,Wikipedia.
BitcoinWebsite(www.bitcoin.com)
CoinDeskWebsite(http://www.coindesk.com/)
6
©2014SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com