How Do Your Readiness Plans Stack Up?
January2011
Unfortunately, Business-Continuity Planning (BCP) and Disaster Recovery (DR) are often at the
bottom of the priority list when it comes to tight budgets. The premier publication for BCP, The
Disaster Recovery Journal, usually has several articles trying to analyze why these activities are
not of paramount interest to top management and how to approach top management to get their
attention.
How are you doing in getting the support you need to build effective business-continuity and
disaster-recovery plans? If you are one of those “top management” guys, are you doing your bit
toensurethatyourcompanywillsurvivetheultimatedisaster?
An interesting insight into these questions can be obtained by comparing the state of your
readiness plans with those of your peers. Annual Readiness surveys by The Standish Group
(www.standishgroup.com) provide this capability, and we report on their
findings below. The Standish Pinpoint surveys study a number of enterprise
questions. They represent the inputs of about 300 top managers from small,
medium, and large companies. About 70% of these managers are with Fortune
500 companies. 20% represent mid-size companies, and the remaining 10%
representsmallcompanies.
Infrastructure
The Standish Readiness Survey contains several questions relating to readiness infrastructure.
Thesesurveyshavetakenplaceannuallyforseveralyears,andthelatestsurveysummarizesthe
results for the last four years. This gives an interesting indication as to the progress companies
aremakingtowardreadiness.
With respect to a company’s readiness infrastructure, the following results show the progress
overthelastfour years.Thepercentageofpositiveresultsisshownfortheyears2007and2010.
2007 2010
Do you allocate high availability and software costs to your DR and 68% 85%
BCPbudget?
Do your systems monitor application processes for failure and 65% 88%
automaticallytakecorrectivemeasures?
Do you have test suites developed to check that the critical failover 42% 55%
functionalityoperatesproperlyonnewlyconfiguredsystems?
1
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

2007 2010
Do you have documented step-by-step procedures for recovering 44% 76%
computingresourcesfollowingasitecatastrophe?
Thefirst question is key– are you getting the budget you need in order to implement an effective
readiness program? Can you obtain the critical hardware and software infrastructure
components needed to maintain the required availability of applications and to recover them in
theeventofadisaster,or aretheseafterthoughtsor workarounds?Mostexecutivesnowfeelthat
theyareproperlyfunded,upsignificantlyfromfouryearsago.
A critical part of the readiness infrastructure is the ability to monitor the data-center components
and to detect failures. If a failure is detected, automatic action should be taken to immediately
recover from the failure so that IT operations will not be affected. Today, it seems that most
companieshaveinvestedinsuchfacilities.
Amajorcontinuing weakness indisaster-recoveryplans is failover testing.Justalittleover half of
thecompaniessurveyedactivelytesttheirfailoverplans.Testingfailovercanbeaveryexpensive
and risky undertaking. However, the alternative to failover testing is hope – a blind faith that
failoverwillworkorcanbemadetoworkinareasonableamountoftime.
Interestingly, though only about half the companies do failover testing, three-quarters of them
have prepared detailed documentation of failover procedures (the survey shows that 90% of
companies either have documentation or plan to have it). This is extremely important since the
middle of a failover crisis is not the time to be trying to figure out what to do. However, will an
untestedbutwell-documentedplanwork?Wehopeitwill.
Unplanned Downtime
An important factor in high availability is the elimination of planned downtime. Planned downtime
is often needed to upgrade hardware, system software, and networks. With proper facilities and
procedures,upgradescanbemadewithnodowntimerequired.
The typical technique for eliminating planned downtime is to upgrade a backup node and then to
fail over to it and upgrade the primary node while the backup node is providing application
services. Can the failover be done fast enough to qualify for no application outage? Will the
failoverwork?
The survey measured the percent of infrastructure components that could be upgraded with no
application outage. Though about half the companies could upgrade about half of their
infrastructure without taking an application outage, almost none could totallyavoid such outages.
Thisiscommensuratewiththecurrentuseofactive/activetechnology.
What percent of hardware, software, network, and other infrastructure
components can be replaced or upgraded without requiring an
applicationshutdown?
Lessthan33% 29%
33%to65% 47%
65%to99% 17%
100% 1%
For eliminating planned downtime, active/active technology1 is the ultimate strategy. An
active/active system is one in which multiple nodes, each with a replicated copy of the current
1WhatisActive/Active?,AvailabilityDigest,October2006.
2
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

application database, are actively processing the application workload. With these systems,
failover simply involves sending the transactions normally being handled by the node to be
upgraded to other surviving nodes in the application network. Failover can be accomplished in
seconds,anditisknownthattheothernodesarecurrentlyoperational.
Skills
The best infrastructure in the world is not much good if there is not a knowledgeable staff to
operate and manage it. The Standish surveyasks several questions concerning the skill levels in
the organization. These questions and the responses follow. In the survey, the possible
responses included “Highly,” “Skilled,” “Moderately,” and “Poorly/No.” The table below shows the
percentthatresponded“Highly”or“Skilled.”
2007 2010
Isyourorganizationskilledin:
maintainingcriticalhardwaresystemsforreadiness? 56% 73%
maintainingcriticalsystemsoftwareforreadiness? 58% 71%
maintainingcriticalnetworkoperations? 49% 61%
maintaining critical computer operational environment (power, air 60% 74%
conditioning,fireprevention,other)?
managingstafftrainingandmaintainingupdateprocedures? 40% 50%
deploying application-level security monitors that detect when 37% 55%
applications are using system resources in an inappropriate or
unusualmanner?
maintaining identical (synchronized) databases and files in both the 28% 46%
primaryandsecondarysites?
maintaining hardware, software, network, and other infrastructure 49% 56%
components so they can be replaced and/or upgraded without
requiringanapplicationshutdown?
creatingapplicationsoftwareforreadiness? 46% 53%
maintaining critical business operations with duplicate peer-level 32% 44%
peopleatmorethanoneoperationalsite?
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0101/what_is_active-active.pdf
3
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Maintenance skill levels are relatively high (60% to 75%) – maintaining hardware, system
software, networks, and environmental systems. The Standish Group points out that hardware
maintenance is being performed more and more by company staff rather than through vendor
support as equipment maintenance is simplified. Standish has seen a marked reduction in the
numberofservicecontractswithtwo-hourorlessresponsetimes.
Coming in a poor second, hovering around 50%, are staff training, security, replication, and
eliminating planned downtime. The low score for replication is disturbing since the maintenance
of a reliable database copy is fundamental to high availability and disaster recovery. Developing
recoverableapplicationswasalsolowonthetotempole.
Of particular concern is that less than half the companies surveyed extended redundancy to
people – having more than one person skilled in each task. Should a disaster happen, it is quite
likely that one or more critical people will be unavailable (hopefully on vacation and not under a
pileofrubble).
However, all in all, there has been significant improvement in all classes of skills over the four
yearscoveredbythesurveys.
What’s Important?
After all is said and done, a critical question is what is most important in achieving a reasonable
state of readiness. Interestingly, those surveyed put technical expertise at the top by a large
margin. A distant second and third were project management and vendor support – both are
furtherformsofexpertise.
What activities have a major impact on your high availability and
readinesssuccess?
Technicalexpertise 78%
Projectmanagement 44%
Vendorsupport 35%
Executivesponsorparticipation 21%
Userparticipation 14%
Having an effective executive sponsor was not rated very highly. This is surprising given the
importance of a sufficient budget. However, since 85% of the respondents indicated that they
wereabletoincludereadinessinfrastructureintheirplans,thismaybeunderstandable.
At the verybottom, with a mere14%, is user participation. This is probablya reflection of the fact
that users are important to application effectiveness but not so much to the underlying
infrastructure.
Summary
The Standish Group Pinpoint surveys contain a great deal moredetailed information than what is
reportedhere.StandishsubscriberscanreferencethesePinpointsbyloggingon,clickingonData
Pinpoints,andthenselectingReadiness.
As the surveys show, the IT state of readiness is certainly improving as time passes and as
application services become more critical to the survivability of the enterprise. However, in many
cases,halfofthesurveyedcompaniesstillhavea waystogoinmanycriticalareas.Theyinclude
failovertesting,stafftraining,andstaffingredundancy.
4
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

ThisaddsimpetustothecreationandmaintenanceofagoodBusinessContinuityPlan.Ifallelse
failsandifITisdown,howisthebusinessgoingtocontinuetofunctionandsurvive?
The Standish Group
TheStandishGroupprovidesresearchservicesfocusedonimprovingprojectsuccessthroughits
CHAOSservicesandonenhancingthevalueofITinvestmentsviaitsTCO/ROIbenchmarks.
5
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com