Rackspace – Another Hosting Service Bites the Dust
December2007
AsOmMaliksaid,“OurInternetinfrastructure…isasfragileasafineporcelaincupontheroofof
acarzippingacrossapot-holedgoattrack.”Thisobservationwasmadeafter yetanotherInternet
infrastructure failure when Rackspace, a major hosting service for thousands of web sites, went
down for reasons that would be hard to anticipate – a truck hitting a transformer that powered its
datacenter.
In spite of triply-redundant power backup, this incident started a sequence of events that resulted
in manyof the web sites which it hosted going down for hours. The one faint glimmer of success
in this disaster is that the company was completely open and honest with its customer base and
workedhardtokeepeveryoneinformed.
Rackspace
Rackspace, headquartered in San Antonio, Texas, provides web
hosting services for thousands of web sites around the world. It
operates eight data centers – four in the U.S. (two in San Antonio, one
in Dallas, Texas, and one in Herndon, Virginia) and four in the U.K.
Founded in 1998, it has grown at a rate in excess of 50% per year and
nowhostsover13,000websitesworldwide.
Rackspacehas historicallybeenamongthemost reliableof thehostingproviders,boastingthatit
provides zero downtime. In fact, its SLA (Service Level Agreement) offers a 5% credit for every
30minutesthatitisdown.
It also boasts about its “fanatical support” and has been named the Best Customer Service
OrganizationbyTheAmericanBusinessAwardsin2005and2007.
The Outage
Sunday,November11,2007,4AM
In spite of claiming zero downtime, November, 2007, was not a good month for Rackspace, After
suffering an outage earlier in the month, Rackspace faced another outage at 4 AM Sunday,
November11.Thisonewasduetoa“mechanicalfailure”as yetundefined(atleastpublicly),and
itknockedouthundredsofcustomersservedbyitsDallasdatacenter.
True to its claim of fanatical support, Rackspace mustered 100 “Rackers” to track down and fix
theproblem.Servicewasrestoredfairlyquickly.
1
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Monday,November12,2007,6:30PM
The next day, while Rackspace was still trying to determine the cause of Sunday’s outage,
disaster struck again. In the early evening of Monday, November 12, at 6:30 PM, it suddenly lost
power to the entire Dallas data center, the same data center that was down the day before.
Unbeknownst to Rackspace, a trucker had passed out and rammed a transformer that fed the
datacenter.Thetransformerexploded,andthedatacenterwentblack.
As planned, Rackspace’s emergency diesel backup generator kicked in; and the data center
cameback tolifeandcontinuedinoperationwithbutabriefinterruption.ThisallowedRackspace
operators to switch to their secondary power source – a completely separate utility line feeding
the building. At this point, the emergency generator had done its job and was shut down. Triple
modularpowerredundancyhadpaidoff.
However, fifteen minutes later, the secondary power source shut down. This time, the blackout
was requested by the emergency personnel trying to free the trapped truck driver so as to avoid
electrocutionof not onlythetruck driver butalso theemergencyworkers.Things werehappening
so fast at the scene of the accident that Rackspace was not notified by the electric utility of the
intenttoshutoffthedatacenterpower.
Again, the emergency generator started up and continued to power the data center. The diesel
generator was designed to power the data center indefinitely(so long as fuel was available), and
thedatacenterwasonceagainoperationalwithlittleimpactonthehostedwebsites.
But a serious and unanticipated problem began to become apparent. With each interruption in
power, the air conditioning chillers had to recycle. It would take them about a half hour to recycle
before they were effectively cooling the data center again. The chillers were down for about
fifteen minutes as a result of the first power outage, and they would have been back on line in
another fifteen minutes, a delay accounted for in the data center design. However, with the
secondinterruptioninpower,thechillershadtoonceagainrecycle.
With thousands of powered servers pumping out heat, the temperature in the data center was
rapidly climbing to a dangerous level. Management realized that this extended time without air
conditioning would cause the servers to overheat and could cause significant damage to the
hardware. Therefore, management reluctantly decided to shut down all of the servers in the data
centertoprotectthem.TheDallasdatacenterwasnowcompletelynonoperational.
The customer damage extended well beyond the thousands of web sites that the Dallas center
hosted. One of the web sites, for instance, was that of 37Signals, a software-as-a-service
company. 37Signals provides software services to millions of end users. All of these users were
nowdownaswell.Thisfailurespreaditsuglytentaclesaroundtheworld.
The Aftermath
Once power and cooling were restored, all of the thousands of servers had to be restored to
service. Most of the web sites were up by the following day, Tuesday. However, they had been
downforhours.
One thing that Rackspace did correctly was to stay in close communication with customers. It
answeredphonecallsandemails,andit keptarunningcommentaryonits progresspostedonits
web site (yes, its site was still up). Management expressed its firm belief in “keeping completely
transparent and honest when communicating with customers, especially when performance
issuesimpactthem.”
The Rackspace CEO told customers that he knew it would takemillions of dollars to make things
right withcustomers butthatthecompanyneeded to doeverything tokeepthem happy. He went
2
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

so far as to offer customers a release from the service contract with Rackspace if they wanted to
migratetoanotherserviceprovider.
A typical Rackspace response was sent in an email by a senior vice president to Om Malik, a
Rackspace customer: “Om, we let you and many others down tonight. Bad luck or not, we failed
to deliver what we promised. We also learned a lot about needing to communicate more in real
time with customers. We are determined to earn back the trust lost tonight. We hope our
customers,includingyou,giveusthatchance.”
As would be expected, the blogs were furious. One noted that Rackspace’s whole “zero
downtime guarantee has actually been almost 10 hours of downtime in the past 48 hours.”
However, there were few if any postings that criticized Rackspace for not keeping customers
informed.
Thiscontrastsgreatlywithsomeotherrecentcasesinwhichcompaniestriedtocoverupmassive
failuresandprovidedlittleif anycommunication withcustomers.OnewasRIM, whoseBlackberry
service for North America went down for over a day in April, 20071. It took RIM twelve hours to
simply acknowledge that there had been an outage, and then there were no details forthcoming
concerningthecauseorwhatsubscriberscouldexpect.
In July of 2007, another major hosting company, Hostway, decided to move a newly acquired
data center from Miami to its own data center in Tampa, Florida.2 It notified customers that their
web sites would be down for ten to twelve hours over the weekend while the move was taking
place. Hostway grossly underestimated the problems associated with the move. The result –
most web sites were down for at least three days, and some were down for a week. Hostway
providedverylittleinformationaboutthestatus of theproblem,postingonlyeveryother dayor so
abriefsummaryonitswebsite.Callsandemailswentunanswered.
In both cases, these two companies were roundly criticized by their customers for their lack of
communication. In contrast, though the Rackspace failure created a lot of criticism among its
customers, almost none of it was directed at a lack of communication. Many of the blogs, in fact,
werequitesympathetic to Rackspace andits current problems,pointingoutthat this was a highly
unlikely and unanticipated sequence of events and that Rackspace had come back online as
quicklyaspossible.
Where’s the Backup?
TheRackspacefailurecouldhavebeenavoidedbyproper disaster planning.Nowhere,evidently,
in Rackspace’s business continuity planning was the concept of data center redundancy. The
N+1 redundancy that Rackspace had built into its emergency UPS (uninterruptible power supply
system) and even its HVAC (heating, ventilation, and air conditioning) system and whatever
redundancy that it had in its server farms came to naught when the entire data center was taken
down.
What if this were a worse disaster – a hurricane taking out its San Antonio data center or a
terrorist taking out a U.K. data center? Web sites could have been off the air for weeks or more
beforeservicecouldberestored.
Rackspace has eight data centers distributed throughout the U.S. and the U.K. Certainly, proper
planning(andsomeinvestment)couldhaveconfiguredthesedatacenters toback eachother up.
In the event that one became nonoperational for any reason, backup facilities in other data
centerscouldhavetakenoverthehostingoftheaffectedwebsites.
1BlackberryGetsJuiced,AvailabilityDigest;May,2007.
2
Hostway’sWebHostingServiceDownforDays,AvailabilityDigest;September,2007.
3
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Lessons Learned
WhatRackspacedidrightwas tokeepinclosecontactwithits customers andtosharetheir pain.
Forthis,theygotkudos.
What Rackspace did wrong was to not consider disaster recovery in its business continuity
planning.Datacenterscanbetakendown.IthappenedtoRackspace.
If you are planning to use third-party service providers for such functions as web-site hosting or
application services, make sure that you understand their business continuity plans and are
comfortable with them. What are their backup configurations? How long will it take for them to
recoverfromanyoneofavarietyoffaults?Theirsurvivabilitymaywellbeyoursurvivability.
AsfortheAvailabilityDigest,weuseGoDaddy.WehopethatwewillnotbewritingaNeverAgain
articleonourhostingserviceprovider.
4
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
