Royal Bank of Canada Goes Active/Active for ATM/POS
July2011
The Royal Bank of Canada (RBC) (www.rbc.com) has taken a major step
towards providing improved service to its customers by modernizing its
active/backup data-center architecture and reengineering it into an active/active
network.1 The end result? Planned outages for system upgrades have been
reducedfromhourstominutes,andrecoveryfromanunplannedoutageresulting
from a system failure or a data-center disaster has been reduced more than
95%fromhoursorevendaystoafewminutes.Mostimportantly,onceanoutage
occurs, the bank’s ATM/POS application services are restored to customers
muchfaster,inmanycaseswithoutthecustomerevenrealizingthatanoutagehasoccurred.
This move was made possible by a dedicated team of IT professionals from RBC and included
significantoperationalandinfrastructurechangestosupportthenewenvironment.
Project Overview
RBC operates the largest ATM/POS network in Canada. Should this network go down, much of
Canadian retail commerce comes to a halt. RBC uses the BASE24TM product from ACI
(www.aciworldwide.com) to manage its
ATM/POS network. BASE24 running on HP
NonStop servers is a major application used
BASE24
globallybybanksforthispurpose. Regions1,2,3,4,5
To ensure continuity of service, RBC operates
two geographically distributed data centers. In unidirectional
datareplication
theoriginalactive/backupconfiguration,onesite
was active while the other was a passive
standby (Figure 1). Recovery of the application,
regardlessifforaplannedorunplannedoutage,
RBC’sOriginalActive/PassiveArchitecture
was time-consuming and complex and typically
Figure1
tookaboutfourhours.
1WhatisActive/Active?AvailabilityDigest;October2006.
1
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Robert Black, RBC’s Project Manager, stated that “We needed to improve our application service
availability and provide a better return on our IT investment with a cost effective and flexible
solution.”Consequently,RBCdecidedtodramaticallyimproveitsarchitectureandrecoverytimeby
upgrading its network capabilities to handle an
active/active architecture and then to actively
BASE24 BASE24
runitsapplicationacrossbothsites(Figure2). Regions1,2 Regions3,4,5
Unfortunately,thebank’soriginalactive/backup
Shadowbase
replication product had neither the necessary bidirectional
datareplication
features nor theflexibilitythat the bank needed
toimplementanactive/activearchitecture.RBC
thus performed an extensive evaluation of
availablesolutions. RBC’sNewActive/ActiveArchitecture
Figure2
The Shadowbase product suite, from Gravic, Inc., was selected to provide the data-replication and
integration solutions. The Shadowbase line of data-replication products provides the bidirectional
data-replication capability with collision detection and resolution needed to implement active/active
systems(www.gravic.com/shadowbase).
Project Results
Previously, when an outage of the primary site occurred, all users were affected and were down
for several hours. Now when an outage occurs at one of the sites, fewer users are affected (only
those connected to that site); and the recoverytakes a significantlyshorter amount of time. More
importantly,failoveris always toaknown-workingsystem andenvironment;asthatsiteisalready
actively running the application. The bank no longer has to worry about whether the disaster-
recoverytargetenvironmentwill“comeup.”
The new architecture also avoids paying for idled system capacity because there is no “standby”
node. All nodes are performing productive work, and all databases are available for application
processing.
Shadowbase achieved the 2011 HP AllianceOne Solution Partner of the Year award for its
contributionstothisproject.
2
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com
|---|--|--|--|
| 0 |  |  |  |
| 1 |  |  |  |