induced blackouts on American soil at will.
https://t.co/xZUTHy9eIp
Harvey and the future of energy
The Hurricane Harvey flooding that overwhelmed much of Houston, Texas, in late August didn't
spare the energy industry. Instead, it provided an argument for a more electrified and decentralized
future. What could and should be done to lessen the impact of the next big one? Was this a once-in-
a-lifetime flooding event or evidence of a new normal? Will the disaster quicken the U.S. shift toward
low-carbon electricity, distributed power and less reliance on fossil fuels?
https://t.co/yOdl3osbI9
Trading on India's Multi Commodity Exchange halted due to glitch
Trading on India’s commodity exchange MCX was halted for almost an hour in early September
because of a technical glitch in the upgraded software version that went live earlier during the
trading day. Trading was halted after client orders failed to go through to the exchange.
https://t.co/BgXuwB06Yg
Subsea cable outage affects iiNet, Internode services
The SMW3 subsea cable between Perth and Singapore that services South East Asia, among other
regions, suffered a break in late summer with a tentative six-week repair date. As a result, TPG-
owned broadband providers iiNet and Internode were forced to re-route their services through their
higher latency US connections. Customers were warned to expect higher than expected latency and
slower speeds to international sites in Asia.
https://t.co/cWTLknBLKO
Internet of Things creates web of hacker risks
While the Internet of Things was intended to make life easier by connecting everyday objects to the
Internet, experts warn that it is also giving new opportunities to hackers. A bipartisan bill introduced
into the U.S. Senate on Aug. 1 — S. 1691, the Internet of Things (IoT) Cybersecurity Improvement
Act of 2017 — would require vendors that provide Internet-connected equipment to the U.S.
government to ensure their products are patchable and conform to industry security standards. It
would also prohibit vendors from supplying devices that have unchangeable passwords or possess
known security vulnerabilities.
https://t.co/cRc8M6HneL
6
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Have We Learned Anything from Famous Downtime Fiascos?
Every company knows that planning for a disaster is an integral part of a business continuity
strategy. After all, any business that relies heavily on IT systems appreciates that even minor
downtime can quickly add up to millions of dollars in lost production. How common is downtime?
According to a survey by Zetta, 54% of IT professionals have experienced an outage lasting eight or
more hours. The most common reasons for downtime among those surveyed were power outages
and hardware failure, circumstances seemingly out of the company's control. But are they?
https://t.co/xhM38oPjzu
Poor Management of Security Certificates Leads to Preventable Outages
Digital security certificates have become a vital part of online communications. Combining
cryptography with a standardized format, they have grown from simple assertions of identity to full
authentication methods. But as important as they have become, security certificates remain fallible.
According to one study, 79 percent of respondents suffered at least one certificate-related outage in
2016. Additionally, 38 percent suffered more than six; and 4 percent experienced 100 or more such
outages last year. Unfortunately, response time is no better: 64 percent of respondents said that
they were unable to respond to a certificate-related security event in six hours or less.
https://t.co/u8S7O7cBcw
New Orleans drainage at mercy of ancient, often broken power plant; cost for full
upgrade: $1 billion
More than 50% of New Orleans’ pumps rely on an archaic 25-cycle power standard generated by in-
house turbines at the Carrollton power plant, a remnant from the original drainage system put in
place a century ago to pump rainwater out of the city. While the city has brought in generators to
provide backup power to pump stations and is working to repair two more damaged turbines, the
mayor has warned the situation remains precarious; and restoring the power plant to full operation is
going to cost millions of dollars.
https://t.co/GxhCCzHFi4
The prediction system for 'doomsday' solar flares: World's most advanced radar will take
astonishingly precise measurements of space weather by 2021
Every few months, the Earth is hit by powerful solar eruptions that can cause power cuts, destruction
of electronic devices, and increased cancer risks. And scientists fear that someday a 'doomsday'
solar flare could be on the way. But the risks of solar storms could soon be reduced, as scientists
are building the world's most advanced space weather radar in the Arctic.
https://t.co/MCSIAZQpC1
Docker brings containers to mainframes
Docker has announced the first major update to its flagship Docker Enterprise Edition 17.06, with a
clear eye to on-premises data centers and DevOps. Docker rolled out the rebranded Docker EE in
March. With that launch, Docker added the ability to port legacy apps to containers without having to
modify the code. The major new feature of this update is support for IBM z Systems mainframes
running Linux. Now containerized apps can be run on a mainframe, with all of the scale and uptime
reliability it brings, and they run with no modifications necessary.
https://t.co/9fWWyS0Oh0
7
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

How to Know if An Active-Active Architecture Right for You
Software defined WANs (SD-WANs) have gained market momentum so quickly because their value
proposition is multi-faceted. Some enterprises have looked to SD-WAN as a way to dramatically
lower network transport costs, while others are building SD-WANs to automate network operations.
One of the more common use-cases is to shift toward an “active-active” architecture.
https://t.co/plC4MXFCrP
Vodacom apologises for airtime glitch
Vodacom recently confirmed that an IT glitch lead to the sudden disappearance of customers’
airtime and data balances. “The issue was caused by a configuration change on our prepaid and
top-up billing system that was problematic. We were able to isolate the cause and roll back this
process during the course of last night. It impacted top-up and pre-paid customers that were on the
network‚" the company said.
https://t.co/F5GpDfdW6G
Cisco's Network Intuitive effort to bring intelligence, machine learning to networking
Cisco has finally bowed to the need for ease of use and automation in its networking products. And
it’s long overdue, CEO Chuck Robbins acknowledged in an interview.
https://t.co/zDYRLQ4xUT
Fujitsu Australia data centre suffers outage, loses bank data
In August, a Fujitsu Australia data centre suffered an outage that caused downtime and data loss at
an Australian bank. The data centre in Homebush, near Sydney, went down between 9.24pm on a
Saturday night and 3am on Sunday. The downtime reportedly caused unrecoverable data loss of
testing and development data that had been running on virtual machines at a major Australian
financial institution.
https://t.co/TUq8hiH3VH
Barclays weekend blackout: what you need to know
Millions of Barclays customers were without access to their accounts online or over the telephone as
the bank shut down to carry out vital work to its systems. The weekend upgrade in August was to
ensure Barclays was fully compliant with new 'ring-fencing' legislation. It was the first of many
planned outages, which will continue for one weekend a month until January, except in December.
https://t.co/2zcV2rjIWY
US State Department suffers global email outage affecting its entire unclassified system
In August, the US State Department experienced a worldwide outage that affected its entire
unclassified system. Officials said the system-wide outage began around 2am EST. A state
department official told Reuters that the outage was caused by a human error and was not due to
any "external action or interference."
https://t.co/MvgNJUWNKQ
8
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Supercomputer sent into space to accelerate mission to Mars
A mission to Mars requires sophisticated computing capabilities to cut down on communication
latencies and ensure astronauts’ survival. To advance this mission, HPE and NASA launched a
supercomputer into space on the SpaceX Dragon Spacecraft. This supercomputer, called the
Spaceborne Computer, is part of a year-long experiment conducted by HPE and NASA to run a
high-performance commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) computer system in space. The goal is for the
system to operate seamlessly in the harsh conditions of space for one year – roughly the amount of
time it will take to travel to Mars.
https://t.co/GXHbv42gBG
Why HPE is sending a supercomputer to the ISS on SpaceX’s next rocket
Hewlett Packard Enterprise is sending a supercomputer to the International Space Station aboard
SpaceX’s next resupply mission for NASA, which is currently set to launch Monday. Officially named
the “Spaceborne Computer,” the Linux-based supercomputer is designed to serve in a one-year
experiment conducted by NASA and HPE to find out if high performance computing hardware, with
no hardware customization or modification, can survive and operate in outer space conditions for a
full year – the length of time, not coincidentally, it’ll likely take for a crewed spacecraft to make the
trip to Mars.
https://t.co/Y4BOtLJpiG
Solar panel hack could knock out power grid
A security researcher has discovered several flaws in solar panels, which could be used by hackers
to shut down the power supply of a country. According to Dutch security engineer Willem Westerhof,
21 vulnerabilities have been found in photovoltaic panels sold by SMA. Of these, 14 vulnerabilities
received a CVE number. The flaws affect the inverters in the solar panels. Westerhof reported the
problem to SMA in December last year.
https://t.co/pjOOe0h1I1
Blockchain hardware in your data center might not solve any problems
Blockchain, an emerging technology that tracks the transactions of digital assets without a central
authority, has primarily run from the public cloud. Now vendors have begun to explore how they can
tap into this interest by supporting blockchain hardware uses on enterprises' own IT infrastructure.
https://t.co/013uGLLfoK
StatsCan needed 30 hours to fix web outage after aging equipment crashed
An incident involving a leaky air conditioner at Statistics Canada's Ottawa data centre in June
mushroomed into a major outage that, among other problems, left some exporters' trucks stuck at
the American border. The rapid escalation of a minor spill into a 30-hour crisis was no accidental
series of escalating events, says the former head of the agency. Instead, it was the result of obsolete
equipment that's the responsibility of Shared Services Canada (SSC) — the government's troubled
IT department.
https://t.co/Y4P6iqrcwN
9
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Taiwan, at the heart of the world’s tech supply chain, has a serious electricity problem
On Aug. 15th at 5pm local time, millions of households and businesses across Taiwan suddenly
went dark. For some, phone lines and TVs went dead for a few hours. For others, entire production
lines came to a halt. Taiwan’s state-backed power monopoly Taipower said that the blackout
was caused by human error. But it’s nevertheless flagging an important issue for the country—
unless it reforms its current pattern of energy consumption, it’s on track to face a major crisis.
https://t.co/QtcDylFdGC
We'll learn a lot from the solar eclipse
Scientists were looking forward to learning a lot from the solar eclipse. But the nation’s energy
suppliers didn’t want any surprises. It was especially important in North Carolina, the state whose
electrical grid was most affected — and for the first time, as solar power confronted a solar eclipse.
https://t.co/Yrc995p6rd
'Perfect storm' of cable cuts led to Atlantic cell outage, says Bell Aliant
Bell Aliant says a widespread outage of its East Coast telecommunications network in August was
the result of a "perfect storm" involving construction crews not checking where to dig. The
breakdown affected emergency services in many parts of the Canadian region, caused widespread
cellular outages on Bell, Telus, Virgin and Koodo, and also interrupted Internet and some land line
services for about four hours.
https://t.co/Z6X1zSZKWa
How HPE is Making Blockchain Resilient
HPE has partnered with R3, the provider of the Corda open-source distributed ledger technology
(DLT) platform, to bring resilience and scalability to DLT applications. HPE NonStop has both a
highly resilient and high-performance database, SQL/MX, and a continuously available platform.
https://t.co/Jk35EW1tYY
Ships fooled in GPS spoofing attack suggest Russian cyberweapon
Reports of satellite navigation problems in the Black Sea suggest that Russia may be testing a new
system for spoofing GPS. This could be the first hint of a new form of electronic warfare available to
everyone from rogue nation states to petty criminals. On 22 June, the US Maritime Administration
filed a seemingly bland incident report. The master of a ship off the Russian port of Novorossiysk
had discovered his GPS put him in the wrong spot – more than 32 kilometres inland, at Gelendzhik
Airport. After checking the navigation equipment was working properly, the captain contacted other
nearby ships. Their AIS traces – signals from the automatic identification system used to track
vessels – placed them all at the same airport. At least 20 ships were affected. While the incident is
not yet confirmed, experts think this is the first documented use of GPS misdirection – a spoofing
attack that has long been warned of but never been seen in the wild.
https://t.co/AqUeiD5TQz
10
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

A Small-Scale Power Solution Could Pay Big Dividends Across the U.S.
The Brooklyn waterfront had all the trappings of a Formula One Grand Prix on a recent weekend,
with high-performance racers taking tight corners at speeds up to 140 m.p.h. But rather than running
on gas, these 20 supercharged Formula E cars and the surrounding venue were largely powered by
renewable sources of electricity. Such a feat was made possible by the installation of a tiny power
grid designed just for the race site by the electricity company Enel.
https://t.co/CVfs3PCN7h
11
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

