Tussling with the Word “Redundant”
December2008
One of the British contributors to our recent series of articles on OpenVMS,1 Colin Butcher of
XDelta Limited, had an objection to our use of “redundant.” We have consistently used
“redundant”tomean“backup,”as in“redundantnodes,”“redundantdatabasecopies,”“redundant
communication links,” and so on. If a system is redundant, it means that it can continue in
operation should one of its redundant components fail. The system continues in operation using
otherbackupcomponents.
Redundancy can take many forms. In an active/backup system, one system is actively providing
all processing; and the redundant system is standing by, prepared to take over should the active
systemfail.
An active/active system is a redundant system with two or more nodes all cooperating in a
common application. Should one node fail, all further transactions are routed to the surviving
nodes,whichwillassumetheloadnormallyhandledbythefailednode.
Likewise,redundantcommunicationlinks canbeused in anactive/backupconfiguration, in which
case one link is idle but is prepared to take over the functions of the active link should it fail.
Alternatively, the redundant links can be sharing the communication load. Should one fail, all
traffic is routed over the surviving link, which must be configured to handle all of the
communicationtraffic.
Backup batteries provide power for a short while to a data center following a power failure, long
enough for the backup diesel generators to kick in. Both the batteries and the diesel generators
areredundantcomponents inthatthesystem canrunfine withoutthem solongas primarypower
isaccessible.Theyareusedonlyintheeventofaprimarypowerfailure.
Andsoon.
Perhaps, unfortunately, the Availability Digest has an American heritage. It is, after all, written by
Americans in English. But is American English the same as English in other cultures? Colin’s
commentspreadsdoubtaboutthat.
He points out that in the U.K., “redundant” means “unnecessary,” as in “His job was made
redundant,sohewasletgo.”Therefore,totheBritish,addingredundancytoasystemmaymean
thatweareaddingunnecessarycomponents.Thishardlymakessense.
Colin suggests, instead, that we use the word “replicate.” Thus, an active/active system would be
areplicatedsetofnodessharingacommonworkload.
1OpenVMSActive/ActiveSplit-SiteClusters,AvailabilityDigest;June,2008.
NHSBT:UKNationalHealthService–BloodandTransplant,AvailabilityDigest;October,2008.
1
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

This usage works for me; but, unfortunately, we have a body of articles and information that is
already wedded to the use of the word “redundant” as meaning “backup.” It is too late for us to
change,thoughperhapswecouldbemoresensitivetothisconfusioninthefuture.
It is interesting to see what the dictionary has to say about this matter. These are the definitions
foundintheMerriam-Websterdictionary:2
 serving as a duplicate for preventing failure of an entire system (as a spacecraft) upon
failureofasinglecomponent(righton!)
 exceedingwhatisnecessaryornormal(Icanlivewiththatone)
 superfluous
 characterizedbyorcontaininganexcess
 usingmorewordsthannecessary
ItgoesontoaddaspecificBritishusage:
 chieflyBritish:nolongerneededforajobandhencelaidoff(Colin’suseoftheword)
Theword“redundant” is probablynottheonlyexampleof confusion.ThoughI don’t(yet) knowof
any other words that can have confusing meanings, there are certainly some that simply don’t
translate. Try telling an American that “This is bespoke software.” You’ll almost certainly get a
blank stare. But to the British, this is a common way to refer to custom software. When I first
asked my British counterpart what “bespoke software” was, he replied, “Why, it is just like a
bespokesuit.”Bighelp!
As Winston Churchill so aptly said when comparing the Americans and the British, “We are two
nationsdividedbyacommonlanguage.”Soweare.
2www.merriam-webster.com
2
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
