ISO 22301 – The New Business Continuity Management Standard
October2012
ISO 22301, issued on May 15, 2012, is the first international standard for Business Continuity
Management (BCM). It builds on the British Standards Institution’s BS 25992-2 standard which has been
widely accepted outside of the UK. It is a relatively brief specification, taking only fifteen pages exclusive
ofdefinitionsandbibliography.
Its title, Societal security – Business continuity management systems – Requirements, was chosen with
care. Societal security refers to the fact that no organization works in a vacuum. It interacts with its
customers,suppliers,governmentagencies,andothers.Assuch,itisacriticalpartofalargersociety.
Business continuity management systems are part of the overall management systems that establish,
implement,operate,review,maintain,andimprovebusinesscontinuity.
Requirementsimplyrigorandcompliance.
Our modern just-in-time business processes would not be possible without interconnected IT systems
and interconnected organizations. A disruption somewhere in this supply chain can have a ripple effect
throughout the society in which the disrupted process or system is a part. Natural and man-made
disasters will happen. We cannot always avert them. But we can anticipate them and take steps to
preventthecascadingoftheconsequencesthatoftenfollow.
PLAN-DO-CHECK-ACT Model
ISO 22301 is based on the ISO PLAN-DO-CHECK-ACT model to establish, implement, operate, monitor,
review, maintain, and improve the effectiveness of the organization’s business continuity management
system(BCMS).
PLAN: Planning establishes the organization’s business
continuity policy. It involves the understanding of the
nature of the organization and formalizes the
commitment of corporate leadership to business
continuity. It plans out the BCMS project objectives, and
itestablishesafoundationfororganizationalsupport.
DO: The BCMS plan is implemented, including a
Business Impact Assessment (BIA) and a Risk
Assessment. The exercising and testing of the plan is
formulated, and the plan becomes operational
throughouttheorganization.
1
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

CHECK: The organization verifies that the performance of the results of the BCMS can be consistently
achieved.Verificationisaccomplishedthrougheffectivemonitoringandongoingevaluationofresults.The
results are communicated to management for review, and actions are determined for remediation and
improvement.
ACT: The changes from the Check phase are incorporated into the plan in a timely manner in order to
maintainandcontinuallyimprovetheBCMS.
The ISO 22301 Specification
ISO 22301 comprises eleven sections, or clauses. The first four clauses (Clauses 0 through 3) are
general,includinganintroductionthatdescribesthePLAN-DO-CHECK-ACT model,aScope,References
(void),anddefinitions.
Clauses four through ten comprise the meat of the specification. Clauses 4 through 7 expand the Plan
phase. Clause 8 describes the DO phase; and Clauses 9 and 10 address, respectively, the Check and
Actphases.
Clause4–ContextoftheOrganization
This clause establishes the scope of the BCMS. The internal and external issues that are relevant to
business continuity are determined. The organization’s services, products, partnerships, and supply
chains are identified, and the organization’s risk tolerance for disruption of any of these relationships is
established.
The organization shall ensure that the applicable legal, regulatory, and other requirements imposed upon
itareprotectedbytheBCMS.
The parts of the organization to be included in the BCMS shall be identified. Any exclusions shall not
affecttheorganization’sabilitytoprovidecontinuityofitsservicesandoperations.
Clause5–Leadership
Top management shall demonstrate leadership and commitment to the BCMS. It shall ensure that the
BCMS requirements are integrated into the organization’s business processes and that appropriate
resourcesneededfortheBCMSareavailable.
Management shall establish a business continuity policy that provides a framework for setting business
continuity objectives, and it shall appoint individuals with the proper authority to be accountable for the
implementationandmaintenanceoftheBCMS.
TopmanagementshallbeactivelyengagedinthetestingandexerciseoftheBCMSandshallensurethat
internalauditsareconducted.
Clause6–Planning
Theorganizationshall determinethe risks andopportunities thatneed tobeaddressedtoensurethatthe
BCMS can achieve its intended outcome with no undesired effects, and it shall provide a plan for
continualimprovement.
Thebusinesscontinuityobjectivesshalltakeintoaccounttheminimumlevelofproductsandservicesthat
isacceptable.Theseobjectivesshallbemonitoredandupdatedasapplicable.
2
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

The organization shall determine who will be responsible for meeting the objectives, what resources will
berequired,andhowtheresultswillbeevaluated.
Clause7–Support
The organization shall provide the resources necessary for the establishment, implementation,
maintenance, and continual improvement of the BCMS. People assigned to BCMS tasks shall be
demonstrably competent. They shall be aware of the business continuity policy, the implications of not
conformingtotheBCMSrequirements,andtheirownroleduringdisruptiveincidents.
The organization shall determine the need for internal and external communications, including the
content, the timing, and the audience for different messages. This shall include communication with
employees, customers, partners, the community, appropriate authorities, and the media. Communication
facilitiesintendedforuseduringdisruptiveeventsshallbetested.
The BCMS shall be documented to the extent determined by the organization as being necessaryfor the
effective implementation of the BCMS procedures. The documented information shall be controlled to
assure its preservation, availability, change control, and the prevention of unintended use of obsolete
information. Protection shall be provided to prevent the compromise or the unauthorized modification or
deletionofthedocumentation.
Clause8–Operations
The organization shall plan, implement, and control the processes needed to meet the BCMS
requirements. It shall establish criteria for the processes and implement control of the processes in
accordancewiththecriteria.
A formal process for business impact analysis and risk assessment shall be established. This analysis
shalltakeintoaccount legalandother requirements thatmaybeimposedonthe corporationandshallbe
keptup-to-dateandconfidential.
The business impact analysis shall identify the activities that support the organization’s products and
services,the impacts of notperformingthese activities, theminimum acceptabletimeframes for resuming
theseactivities,andthedependencies for theseactivities includingsuppliers,partners,andother relevant
parties.
The risk assessment evaluates the risk of disruptive events to the organization. It identifies which
disruptive risks require treatment and describes the treatments commensurate with the organization’s
businesscontinuityobjectives.
Based on the results of the business impact analysis and the risk assessment, the organization shall
determinea strategytoprotectprioritized activities.This strategyshallincludestabilizing,recovering, and
resumingprioritizedactivitieswithinthespecifiedtimeframesandmitigatingtheimpactoftheirdisruption.
Proactive measures for reducing the likelihood of disruption of prioritized activities, shortening the
disruption period, and limiting the impact of a disruption on the organization’s products and services shall
beconsidered.
The resources needed to implement the strategies shall be determined. Resources include people,
information and data, equipment, facilities and consumables, IT and communication systems,
transportation,finance,andpartners.
The procedures to be followed in the event of a disruption shall be well documented. They shall be
specific regarding the immediate steps to be taken during a disruption and be flexible to respond to
unanticipated threats and changing conditions. Impact thresholds that justify the initiation of a formal
3
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

response shall be identified, and communication with interested parties, emergency responders,
authorities,andthemediashallbespecified.Lifesafetyshallbethefirstpriority.
There shall be documented procedures for restoring normal business activities from the temporary
measuresadoptedtosupportthedisruption.
The organization’s business continuity procedures shall be exercised and tested periodically to ensure
thattheyareconsistentwiththeorganization’sbusinesscontinuityobjectives.
Clause9–PerformanceEvaluation
The organization shall determine what needs to be monitored and measured and the methods and
intervals for these activities. These procedures shall define the performance metrics appropriate to the
needsoftheorganization.Resultsshallberecordedtofacilitatesubsequentcorrectiveactions.
When a disruptive incident occurs, a post-incident review shall be undertaken to determine the
effectivenessoftheBCMSandtosuggestpotentialimprovementstoit.
The organization shall conduct internal audits periodically to determine whether the BCMS conforms to
the organization’s requirements and is effectively implemented and maintained. Those responsible for an
areabeingauditedshallensurethatanynecessarycorrectionsareundertakenwithoutunduedelay.
Top management shall review the BCMS at prescribed intervals to ensure its continued suitability,
adequacy, and effectiveness. The review shall conclude with proposed revisions to the BCMS to improve
itseffectiveness.
Clause10–Improvement
Nonconformitywiththeorganization’sbusinesscontinuityobjectivesmaybediscoveredviatheexercising
and testing of the BCMS, via the internal audits, or from top management reviews. Nonconformites shall
becorrectedviachangestotheBCMS.
An evaluation shall be undertaken to determine if a nonconformity occurs elsewhere. If so, additional
correctionstotheBCMSshallbemade.
Theorganizationshallcontinuallyimprovethesuitability,adequacy,andeffectivenessofitsBCMS.
Summary
ISO 22301 is just the first business continuity specification to be issued by ISO. Coming soon are ISO
22313 – Guidance to Creating a Business Continuity Management System and ISO 22390 – Guidelines
forExercisingandTesting
Acknowledgement
Wethankoursubscriber,Dr.BruceHolenstein,forbringingthistopictoourattention.
4
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com