Failure State Diagrams – Recovery Following Repair
December2007
Failure State Diagrams Reviewed
In our September, 2007, Geek Corner article, Calculating Availability – Failure State Diagrams,
we introduced failure state diagrams as a formal way to derive availability relationships. A failure
state diagram contains nodes that represent various states of failure of a system and connectors
thatindicatewaysinwhichonestatemaytransitiontoanother.
Each connector is characterized by the rate at which its source state will transition to its target
state. In the steady state, the transition rates exiting a state must equal the transition rates
enteringastate.
For instance, Figure 1 shows a system with two states, S and S . The system will be in state S
1 2 1
with a probability of p , and it will be in state S with a probability of p . When in state S , the
1 2 2 1
system will transition to state S at a rate of r . Likewise, when the system is in state S , it will
2 1 2
transition to state S at a rate of r . Therefore, the total transition rate from state S to S is p r ;
1 2 1 2 1 1
andthetotaltransitionratefromstateS toS isp r .
2 1 2 2
r
1
S S
1 2
p  p 
1 2
r
2
SimpleFailureStateDiagram
Figure1
Whataretheprobabilitiesthatthesystemwillbeineitherstate?
Since the exiting transition rate from a state must be equal to its entering transition rate in the
steady-statecondition,then
pr p r forstateS
11 22 1
p r pr forstateS
22 11 2
Notethatforthesetwonodes,therearetwoequations;buttheyarenotindependent(inthistrivial
case,theyare, infact,the same).Ingeneral,for an n-node system,there will be nequations; but
only n-1 of them will be independent (that is, any one of the equations can be derived from the
others). Since we want to solve for n variables (the n probabilities), we need one more equation.
Thisequationissimplytheobservationthattheprobabilitiesmustadduptoonesincethesystem
willalwaysbeinoneandonlyonestate.Thus,
p p 1
1 2
1
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

These equations can now be solved for the probabilities that the system will be in state S or in
1
stateS :
2
r
probabilitythatthesystem willbeinstateS p  2
1 1 r r
1 2
r
probabilitythatthesystem willbeinstateS p  1
2 2 r r
1 2
In our October article, Failure State Diagrams – Repair Strategies, we applied failure state
diagramstosequentialandparallelrepairstrategiestoderivetherelationshipsthatwehadearlier
informallyderivedfor these strategies.Wenow applythis technique toformalize our intuitive look
atsystemsthatneedtoberecoveredoncetheyarerepaired.
Application of the Failure State Diagram to Recovery
IntuitiveAnalyses
In our December, 2006, article entitled Calculating Availability – The Three Rs, we informally
derived the availability of a system that required recovery following a repair. In these systems,
should one node fail, the system continues in operation in simplex mode until the failed node is
returned to service. The failure is transparent to the user. However, if both nodes fail, the system
is down until at least one node is repaired. Before returning it to service, however, the system
must be recovered. Recovery might include, for instance, rebuilding the database, starting
applications,andtestingthesystem.
Ouranalysisledtotherelations:
A=1-F (1)
n(n1)r/2R
F (1a)2 forparallelrepairandonesparenode (2)
2 r/2
rR
Fn(n1) (1a)2 forsequentialrepairandonesparenode (3)
r
where
A =systemavailability(theprobabilitythatthesystemwillbeup)
F =probabilityofsystemfailure(theprobabilitythatthesystemwillbedown)
r =repairtime
R =recoverytime
n =numberofnodesinthesystem
a =nodalavailability
This relationship was based on a loose statement that since the return-to-service time had to be
increased from r to r + R, we had to increase the failure probability by a factor of
r /(r +R).Wenowconfirm this intuitiveinsightformallywithfailurestatediagramsfor thecase of
parallelrepair.Thederivationforthecaseofsequentialrepairissimilar.
RepairFollowedbyRecovery
The failure state diagram for a system that must be recovered following its repair is shown in
Figure 2. The system comprises n nodes. There is one spare node in the system. Therefore, the
system will survive the failure of any one node. Should any two nodes fail, the system is down.
2
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Once a node is repaired, the system must be recovered before it can be returned to service
(rebuildthedatabase,loadapplications,testthesystem,etc.).
There are four states in this system. In state S , all nodes are operational. In state S , one node
0 1
has failed; but the system continues in operation. In state S , two nodes have failed; and the
2
system is down. In state S , one of the two downed nodes has been repaired; and the system is
3
undergoingrecovery.
A node failure in state S will cause a transition to state S . Each node fails at the rate of 1/mtbf,
0 1
where mtbf is the mean time between failure for a node (i.e., if the nodal mtbf is 1,000 hours,
each node will fail once every 1,000 hours, or 0.001 failures per hour). Therefore, in state S in
0,
which n nodes are operational, the nodal failure rate will be n/mtbf. This is the rate at which the
systemwilltransitionfromstateS tostateS .
0 1
When in state S , it will take a repair time of mtr (mean time to repair) to repair the node. Thus,
1
thesystemwilltransitionfromstateS backtostateS atarateof1/mtr.
1 0
Alternatively, while in state S , a second node could fail. In this case, the system will enter state
1
S , at which point the system is down. Since there are n-1 nodes operational in state S , the
2 1
transitionratetostateS is(n-1)/mtbf.
2
WhileinstateS ,oneofthetwodownednodes willberepairedandthesystemwillmovetostate
2
S , where it will undergo recovery. Since there are two nodes in state S being repaired in
3 2
parallel, the average repair time is mtr/2. Transitions from state S to state S will therefore occur
2 3
atarateof2/mtr.RecoverytakesatimeR.Therefore,atarateof1/R,thesystem willenterstate
S whereitwillonceagainbeoperational,albeitwithonenodedown.
1,
systemup systemdown
allnodes onenode twonodes
up down down
n/mtbf (n1)/mtbf
S S S
0 1 2
(p ) (p) (p )
0 1 2
1/mtr
2/mtr
1/R
S
3
mtbf=meantimebeforefailure (p )
mtr=meantimetorepair 3
systemin
recovery
RecoveryFailureStateDiagram
Figure2
In the steady state, the transitions into and out of each state must be equal. This leads to the
followingstatetransitionprobabilities:
StateTransitionEquations
3
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

State0 p n/mtbf p /mtr
0 1
State1 p [1/mtr(n1)/mtbf]p n/mtbfp /R
1 0 3
State2 2p /mtr p (n1)/mtbf
2 1
State 3 p /R2p /mtr
3 2
Solvingforthestateprobabilitiesintermsofp ,wehave
0
StateProbabilities(intermsofp )
0
p p
0 0
n(mtr) (1a)
p  p n p
1 mtbf 0 a 0
n(n1) mtr2 n(n1)(1a)2
p  p  p
2 2 mtbf2 0 2 a2 0
R (1a)2
p  n(n1)
3 mtr a2
wherewehaveusedthefactthat
mtbf
1
mtr mtbfmtr 1a
 
mtbf mtbf a
mtbfmtr
To solve for the state probabilities, we must now make use of the fact that the sum of the
probabilitiesmustbe1:
p p p p 1
0 1 2 3
Thisletsussolveforthestateprobabilitiesasafunctionofnodalavailability,a:
StateProbabilities(intermsofa)
p a2/D
0
p na(1a)/D
1
n(n1)
p  (1a)2/D
2 2
R
p  n(n1)(1a)2/D
3 mtr
where
n(n1) R
Da2 na(1a) (1a)2  n(n1)(1a)2
2 mtr
n(n1)mtr/2R
a2 na(1a) (1a)2 (4)
2 mtr/2
The system is down if it is in state S or state S . Thus, the probabilityof failure of the system, F,
2 3
istheprobabilitythatthesystemwillbeinstateS orstateS :
2 3
4
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

n(n1) R
Fp p  (1a)2/D n(n1)(1a)2/D
2 3 2 mtr
or
n(n1)r/2R
F (1a)2/D (5)
2 r/2
wherewehavesubstitutedrformtrforeaseofnotation.
Equation (5) is the true expression for the availability of a single-spared n-node system that
requires recovery after a parallel repair. It is equivalent to our intuitive Equation (2) except for the
denominator D. To the extent that the value of D departs from one, D represents the error in our
intuitiveapproach.
Dcanbewrittenas
n(n1)r/2R
Da2 na(1a) (1a)2
2 r/2
n(n1)r/2R 
[a2 2a(1a)(1a)2](n2)a(1a) 1 (1a)2
 
 2 r/2 
[a(1a)]2 func(1a)
1func(1a)
1
D is equal to 1 plus some function of (1-a). If (1-a) is small, func(1-a) can be ignored; and D is
approximatelyequal to one. Thus, we find that the accuracyof the intuitive approach of Equation
(2) depends upon the nodal availability a being very close to one and therefore (1-a) being very
small. It also depends upon there being a modest number of nodes in the system. (More
specifically, it depends upon the quantity (n-2)a(1-a) being very small.) This is certainly the case
for the high-availability systems in which we are interested. Under these assumptions, D is
approximatelyone;andtheintuitiverelationshipholds.
If nodal availabilityis not close to one (sayless than two 9s), or if there are hundreds of nodes in
thesystem,themoreaccurateEquation(5)shouldbeused.
Summary
Our intuitive expressions for system availability for a system requiring recovery after a parallel
repair are valid provided that the nodal availability is high and that the number of nodes in the
system is modest. This is certainly the case for the redundant systems with which we are
concerned.
Should these approximations not be valid, Equation (5) should be used to calculate the
availabilityofasingle-sparedsystemthatisunderparallelrepairandthatneedsrecovery.
A similar analysis will verify the accuracy of Equation (3) for recovery following sequential repair.
The only differences are that the transition rate from state S to state S is 1/mtr and that there is
2 3
nofactorof2inEquation(4).Thatis
mtrR
Da2 na(1a)n(n1) (1a)2
(6)
mtr
forsequentialrepair.
5
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
