The Planet Blows Up
September2008
On Saturday, May31, 2008, an explosion blew out three walls in the Houston data center of The
Planet, one of the world’s largest providers of dedicated servers for more than 22,000
businesses.Theresultingdamagedisabled9,000serversusedby7,500 webhostingcompanies,
taking down web sites serving millions of customers. It was days before service was completely
restored.1
The Planet
ThePlanetprovidesdedicatedserversforavarietyofcompanies,manyofwhichareweb-hosting
companies. Operating six data centers, two in Houston, Texas, and four in Dallas, Texas, The
Planet is the largest privately-held dedicated-server hosting company and the fourth-largest such
companyintheworld.
Most of its customers are wholesalers. They lease dedicated servers from The Planet and resell
time on their leased servers to other users, primarily retail merchants operating their own online
stores.ThesesitesservemillionsofInternetcustomers.
The Planet has recently begun to offer managed hosting services directly to businesses of
anysize.
1InformationforthisarticlewasobtainedfromthefollowingsourcesoverthetimeperiodfromMay31toJune3,2008:
TheIndustryStandard
CenterNetworks
MSFNForums
dslreports.com
TheTechHerald
TheRegister
ThePlanetForums
1
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

The Explosion
At 5:55 pm on Saturday, May 31, an explosion took down
ThePlanet’s H1Houstondatacenter.Itis conjectured that
a short circuit in a high-volume wire conduit set a
transformer on fire, which then caused an explosion of
battery-acidfumesfromtheUPSbattery-backupsystem.2
The explosion was strong enough to blow down three
walls surrounding the
electrical equipment
room on the first floor
UPSbatteryroom
of the data center. It
blew apart the power-transfer switch that transferred the
data center from utilitypower to backup diesel generator
power, thus knocking out power to the entire data
center.Fortunately,noonewasinjured.
Though no servers or networking equipment was
damaged, 9,000 servers leased by 7,500 customers
three-phasepowertransferswitches
were brought down due to the power outage. More than
one million retail sites were affected by the explosion, denying service to millions of Internet
users.
For safety reasons, the fire department evacuated the
building and directed that the backup generators could
notbeturnedon.Itwasn’tuntilafter 10pm thatstaffwere
allowedbackintothebuildingtoassessthedamage.
At this time, Doug Erwin, the CEO of The Planet, issued
thefollowingstatement:
“This evening at 4:55 pm CDT in our H1 data center,
electrical gear shorted, creating an explosion and fire
dieselgenerators
that knocked down three walls surrounding our
electrical equipment room. Thankfully, no one was injured. In addition, no customer
serversweredamagedorlost.
We have just been allowed into the building to physically inspect the damage. Early
indications are that the shortwas in ahigh-volumewireconduit.Wewere not allowedto
activateourbackupgeneratorplanbasedoninstructionsfromthefiredepartment.
This is a significant outage, impacting approximately 9,000 servers and 7,500
customers. All members of our support team are in, and all vendors who supply us with
data-center equipmentareonsite.Our initialassessment,althoughearly,points tobeing
able to have some service restored by mid-afternoon on Sunday. Rest assured we are
workingaroundtheclock.
Weareintheprocess of communicating withall affectedcustomers.Weareplanningto
post updates every hour via our forum and in our customer portal. Our interactive voice
responsesystemisupdatingcustomersaswell.
Thereisnoimpactinanyofourotherfivedatacenters.
2PhotographsbyKevinHazardofThePlanet.
2
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Iamsorrythatthisaccidenthasoccurred,andIapologizefortheimpact.”
Asweshallsee,itwasdaysbeforefullservicewasrestored.
The Recovery
ThePlanet immediatelymobilized their staff and the staff of their vendors for anaround-the-
clock recovery effort. They determined what equipment had been destroyed and arranged
forimmediatereplacementofthisequipment.
Thestaffwasabletomovesomecustomerstonewserversinotherdatacenters,butlimited
cooling capacity in the data centers limited this to only a few customers. Shortly after the
explosion,ThePlanethadtodenyfurtherrequestsforreprovisioning.
Sundayevening,Mr.Erwinreleasedthefollowingstatement:
“As previouslycommitted,I wouldliketoprovideanupdateon where westandfollowing
yesterday’s explosion in our H1 data center. First, I would like to extend my sincere
thanks for your patience during the past 28 hours. We are acutely aware that uptime is
critical to your business, and you have my personal commitment that The Planet team
will continue to work around the clock to restore your service. As you have read, we
have begun receiving some of the equipment required to start repairs, While no
customer servers have been damaged or lost, we have new information that damage to
our H1 data center is worse than initially expected. Three walls of the electrical
equipment room on the first floor blew several feet from their original position, and the
undergroundcablingthatpowersthefirstfloorofH1wasdestroyed.Thereissomegood
news, however. We have found a way to get power to Phase 2 (upstairs, second floor)
ofthedatacenterandtorestorenetworkconnectivity.”
As Mr. Erwin indicated, 3,000 of the affected servers were on the first floor of the data
center;and6,000serverswereonthesecondfloor.ThePlanet’sstaffwasabletogetpower
to the second-floor servers, and around 5 pm Monday evening - two days after the
explosion,thesecond-floorserverswereonceagainoperational.
Restoring power to the first-floor servers was a much more difficult challenge due to the
extensive damage. Each of these servers was brought online as soon as possible, but four
daysaftertheexplosion,fullservicetoallcustomershadyettoberestored.
Communication
As we have said in previous articles, communication between the company experiencing the
disaster and its customers is essential. The Planet tried very hard to provide excellent
communicationsbutwithmixedreviews.
Its staff made frequent online updates to The Planet’s forum to keep their customers apprised of
what was going on. Until late in the evening of the explosion, Planet staff posted updates every
fifteen minutes, even if the message said that there was no update at this time. Late in the
evening,theupdatescontinuedonatimeframeofaboutoneperhour.
The Planet’s automated voice response system was kept updated as well. However, many users
complainedthattheycouldnotgettoarealpersontofindoutadditionaldetail.
3
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

As one might expect, The Planet’s blog became very active, both with support and with
complaints. There were outcries when Planet staff allegedly started to delete negative blog
entriesfromtheforum.3
Lessons Learned
The obvious question to ask following this disaster is why The Planet did not have backup
plans to cover a complete data-center outage given that most of its customers are web-
hosting companies servicing millions of Internet users? It certainly had the geographical
distribution to do this with its six data centers, but it did not have the network capacity nor
the cooling capacity to add a significant number of servers to its other data centers. In fact,
The Planet had just gone through a facilities consolidation effort that resulted in a significant
reduction of cooling capacity required across the data centers. Obviously, no thought had
beengiventoabackupplanthatperhapsmightrequirethisexcesscapacity.
However, there is a more fundamental lesson here. Not only can the timing of disasters not
be predicted, but the nature of disasters cannot be predicted. Remember the Rackspace
outage caused by a truck hitting a transformer outside of its data center?4 Shortly after
switching to diesel generators and then to its independent secondary power source,
emergencypersonnelkilled thatpower,too,causingthediesel generators tocometolifefor
a second time. The rapid recycling of Rackspace’s chillers during the dual power outage
caused the chillers to provide insufficient cooling, and the servers had to be shut down
because of rapidly rising heat in the data center. The thousands of web sites that the data
centerhostedweredownuntilthenextday.
Like the incidents at The Planet and Rackspace, it is impossible to protect a data center
against all disasters. You can’t anticipate what you don’t know. The only option is to ensure
that there is a backup plan in place that will allow the company’s services to continue at an
alternatesiteshouldthedatacenterbetakenoutofservice.
The Planet disaster demonstrates the need for tiered backup. In its case, The Planet
provided dedicated servers to web-hosting companies. Each of these companies hosted the
web sites of hundreds or thousands of small to mid-sized end-user companies. From an
end-user’s viewpoint,afailureanywherealongthischain wouldtakedownitssiteandcostit
perhapsthousandsofdollarsperhourinlostrevenue.
Therefore, it is important that the primary provider of computing capacity – The Planet, in
this case – be able to switch over to an alternate facility. Likewise, each of the web-hosting
companies must have a similar plan in case one of their data centers goes down or their
service provider goes down. Finally, the end-users must have a backup plan to protect
themselvesfromanyfailurealongthechain.
The higher in the processing chain, the more important it is to be able to recover from a
data-center disaster. This applies not only to companies providing dedicated computing
capacity, such as The Planet, but also to those who provide cloud-computing services,
software-as-a-service(SaaS),utilitycomputing, gridcomputing,andother central-computing
services.
Perhaps an impediment to such plans is the additional cost. However, there is nothing that
says that this cost cannot be passed on to the customer as an additional service. An
excellent example of such a service is Amazon’s new Availability Zones, as recently
3 Interestingly, the updates posted to The Planet’s forum by Planet staff seem to have disappeared from the forum’s
archive, which is accessible from The Planet’s web site. However, these updates can be accessed directly at
http://forums.theplanet.com/index.php?showtopic=90185.
4Rackspace–AnotherHostingServiceBitestheDust,AvailabilityDigest;December2007.
4
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

described in an Availability Digest article.5 Also, IBM is investing $300 million to build
thirteen cloud-computing backup centers in ten countries. They will provide data-center
disaster recovery within two to six hours.6 Perhaps the day of the reliable compute utility is
onthehorizon.
5HowMany9sinAmazon,AvailabilityDigest;July2008.
6IBMtospend$300millionon13“cloudcomputing”backupcentresin10countries,domain-b.com;August21,2008.
5
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
