Windows XP Retirement a Boon for Hackers
October2013
Windows XP was the first consumer-oriented operating system produced by Microsoft to be
built on the Windows NT kernel. Microsoft plans to retire its venerable, twelve-year old and
popular XP operating system on April 8, 2014.Windows XP1 is currentlyused on over a third
of all PCs worldwide and will still be running on over 25% of PCs by the time it is retired.2 (Windows 7
nowrunson50%ofallPCs,andWindows8isadistantthirdat8%.)
Hacker Heaven
Windows has always been the primary target of hackers. It is reported that
99% of all virus attacks target Windows systems. Microsoft issues security
patches monthly to protect systems against known attacks. If a security bug is
critical and is widely spread, Microsoft will go outside of its normal monthly
patchscheduleandissueemergencyfixes.
Hacking can be rewarding for the hackers who discover new vulnerabilities (so-called zero-day
vulnerabilities because they have not yet surfaced). An average price for a new Microsoft exploit ranges
fromUSD$50,000to$150,000.
The retirement of Windows XP raises a severe security risk for users who continue to run their PCs on
XP. As of the retirement date, Microsoft will no longer issue patches to correct security flaws or other
bugsintheoperatingsystem.
Therefore, it is expected that hackers will begin to bank their zero-dayvulnerabilities until Microsoft stops
patching XP next April. At that time, they may use the vulnerabilities themselves or sell them to others.
The value of these vulnerabilities may soar since they may now be useful for months if not for years.
Userswillhavetocountontheiranti-malwareproductstodetectandquarantinetheattacks.
If the prediction of zero-day vulnerability banking is correct, there should be signs of it. Most notably, it is
expected that there will be a sharp drop in publicly disclosed new vulnerabilities leading up to the
retirementdate.
There is no precedent for this situation. The last time that Microsoft retired an operating system was in
July, 2010, when it stopped supportingWindows 2000. At that time,Windows 2000 powered just 0.4% of
allPCs;andongoingsupportwasnotanissue.
Aside from simply living with the problem, most users have only one other option. That is to upgrade to
Windows 7 orWindows 8.1 (or even to an Apple iOS system).This not onlyrequires an upgrade fee, but
it will often require the purchase of new PCs to meet the memory and speed requirements of the new
1“XP”comesfrom“eXPerience,”intendedtohighlighttheextendeduserexperience.
2Windows2003willberetiredonthesamedate,butitsuseisminiscule.
1
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

operating systems. Many users are reluctant to upgrade to Windows 8.1 because it has a different look
andfeelfromXP.However,Windows7isverysimilartoWindowsXP.
An Option for Large Users
For large corporations and government agencies that have hundreds or thousands of PCs, the cost of
purchasing all new hardware can be prohibitive. It must be done incrementally over a period of time to fit
within budgets. For these organizations, there is an option – Microsoft’s Custom Support program. The
Custom Support program provides security updates for a fee for months or years for operating systems
thathavebeenofficiallydeclaredretired.
The Microsoft Security Response Center (MSRC) classifies problems into four categories – critical,
important, moderate, and low. For companies who decide to purchase Custom Support, Microsoft will
continue to provide patches for bugs rated as critical by MSRC. It will also provide patches for important
bugsforanadditionalfee.Itwillnotprovidepatchesformoderateorlowbugs.
Microsoft structures the cost of Custom Support to encourage users to upgrade to a newer operating
system.ThoughMicrosoftdoes notpublishthecostofCustom Support,itis reportedthatitis about$200
perPCforthefirstyear.Thereafter,thefeegoes upeveryyearandterminates afterthree years.Bythen,
Microsoftexpectsthatthecompanyhascompleteditsupgradetonewsystems.
Summary
ComputerworldseessixoptionsthatareopentoMicrosoftinordertoeasetheburdenofthistransitionon
itsXPusers:
1. Continue free patching for critical and perhaps for important vulnerabilities. However, this
approachwouldbeunpalatabletoexistingCustomSupportcustomers.
2. Selectivelypatchforfreeonlycriticalbugsthatarebeingactivelyexploitedbyhackers.
3. Providelimitedcustomsupporttosmallcustomersforasmallerfee.
4. HeavilydiscountWindows7orWindows8.1toexistingXPusers.
5. Somecombinationoftheabove.
6. Donothing.
Atthispointintime,itappearsthatOption6istheoptionofchoiceforMicrosoft.
Acknowledgements
Informationforthisarticlewastakenfromthefollowingsources:
XP’sretirementwillbehackerheaven,Computerworld;August12,2013.
MicrosoftwillcraftXPpatchesafterApril’14,butnotforyou,Computerworld;August26,2013.
WindowsXP’susersharenose-dives,Computerworld;September2,2013.
AVAST:WindowsXP’sRetirementWillCauseaMajorTechnologyCrisis,Softpedia;September5,2013.
2
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com