Do the Russians Have Your Tax Returns?
August2015
In May, 2015, the U.S. Internal Revenue Service (IRS) announced that one of its
systems had been breached and that the tax returns of over 100,000 taxpayers had
been stolen. Three months later, the IRS tripled this estimate. Already, tax returns for $50,000,000 in
fraudulenttaxrefundshavebeenfiled.
The Hack
The“GetTranscript”Application
The hackers entered the IRS computer system that was running the “Get
Transcript” application. The application allows taxpayers to get copies of their tax
returns for prior years. This is often necessary for tasks such as applying for a
mortgageorapplyingforcollegefinancialaid.
The Get Transcript application was used by 23 million U.S. taxpayers last year.
Other IRS computer systems such as IRS’ main system for handling tax return
submissionswerenotinvolvedinthebreach.
TheInitialEstimate
In mid-May, 2015, the IRS noticed unusual activity being experienced by the Get Transcript application.
At first, they thought that the activity might be part of a Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attack
intended to shut down the web site. However, they quickly determined it instead was caused by criminal
hackers trying to gain access to taxpayer records. The IRS immediately shut down the application to
preventfurtherbreaches.
Upon further investigation, the IRS determined that the attack had been going on for four months since
the previous February. It announced that the tax records of about 114,000 taxpayers had been
compromised. These returns are full of personal information that is now available to the hackers. Another
100,000attemptstoaccessdatawereunsuccessful.
TheCurrentEstimate
TheIRSsetouttoinvestigatethemillionsofGetTranscriptrequeststhathadbeenmadesincetheattack
began.Asaresult,theagencytripleditsestimateofthenumberoftaxpayers whowereaffected.TheIRS
now says that 334,000 taxpayer accounts were breached and that another 280,000 attempts were
unsuccessful.
1
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

HowtheHackersGotIn
In this attack, the cybercriminals did not secrete malware on the IRS system togive them a back door for
access.Rather,theycameinthroughthefrontdoor.UsingsocialmediasuchasFacebook,theyacquired
vastamountsofdataabouttaxpayers.Thisincludedtaxpayernames,SocialSecuritynumbers,birthdays,
and street addresses, which allowed the cybercriminals to begin the logon procedure to the Get
Transcript application. The attackers also had to determine (or guess) the answer to several personal
security questions such as what high schools did taxpayers attend or what were the names of their first
pets.
Armed with this information, the cybercriminals posed as legitimate taxpayers and logged in. They
typically were not successful on the first attempt as they tried to guess the answers to personal security
questions.However,oftentheywereultimatelysuccessful;andtheythenhadfullaccesstothetaxpayers’
tax returns. Based on the large increase in request traffic observed by the IRS, the guesses to personal
securityquestionswereprobablyautomatedbyremoteattackcomputers.
How did the agency determine that an account had been attacked? Perhaps it searched for accounts
against which multiple attempts to open the account had been attempted unsuccessfully. If an account
was ultimately opened after several tries, it was a successful breach. If an account failed to be opened
aftermultipletries,itwasanattackthathadfailed.
Who Were the Hackers?
Studying the attack methods, the IRS came to the conclusion that the cyber breach originated in Russia.
It believes that this was the work of an organized crime syndicate with an army of hackers that could
submitsuchamassoflogonattemptstotheGetTranscriptapplication.
This attack came on the heels of a disclosure that Russian hackers had infiltrated the White House and
the U.S. State Department computers. Security researchers had revealed in March how easy it was to
hacktheIRSsystems.TheIRSindependentwatchdoghadrecentlyissuedareportsayingthat“computer
securityhasbeenproblematicwiththeIRSsince1997.”
What is the Damage?
The damage of most concern is that the crooks now have a great deal of sensitive information about
hundredsofthousandsof Americancitizens.Thisinformation,whichincludessalaryas wellasthedetails
of deductions taken by the victims, can be used to open bank accounts, obtain credit lines, and steal tax
refundsinthefuture.
So far, the IRS has indicated that about 15,000 phony tax returns have been submitted in other peoples’
names.ThereturnsrequesttaxrefundstotalingUSD$50,000,000.
What Is the IRS Doing About It?
The IRS immediately shut down the Get Transcript application. For several subsequent months,
taxpayers hadtorequestpasttax returns besenttothem bymail.Tomaketherequest,theyhadtofilea
Form4506,“RequestforCopyofReturn.”
TheIRShasnowre-enabledtheGetTranscriptapplication.However,taxpayersmustcreateanewlogon
andselectnewpersonalsecurityquestions.
A taxpayer now can lock or disable access to his account, and the IRS is trying to increase security with
the right balance. It is trying to make access difficult for fraudsters but not too difficult for the average
persontryingtogetholdofhisprevious years’returns.
2
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

The IRS is notifying by mail everyone whose account was attacked (whether successful or not). It is
offering free credit monitoring for the taxpayers whose accounts were breached as well as giving those
taxpayers an individualized six-digit PIN to use for authorization. The IRS will monitor these returns more
closelynextyear,lookingforsignsoffraudulentreturns.
The attack is under review by the Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration and the IRS’
Criminal Investigation Unit. It is also being investigated by the Department of Homeland Security and the
FederalBureauofInvestigation(FBI).
The Lawsuit
A class-action lawsuit representing all of the taxpayers who were affected by the breach has been filed
against the IRS for failing to secure its servers. The lawsuit states that “the IRS knew it was vulnerable
and deliberately and intentionally decided not to implement the security measures needed to prevent the
databreach.”
Summary
Even though a lot has been made about the fact that the IRS systems may be vulnerable to attack, this
data breach is concerning because its system was not hacked. Rather, a very sophisticated approach
was taken.Amassiveamountof data was acquiredoneach of thetaxpayers from non-IRSsources such
as Facebook and was used to log on to the system as the taxpayers themselves. In effect, the hackers
came in through the front door. Any system, no matter the amount invested in it to make it secure, is
subjecttothissortofattack.
Fortunately, such an attack should be easily discoverable because of an unexpected increase in the
amountoftrafficasfaultylogonsareretrieduntiltheyaresuccessful.
Acknowledgements
Informationforthisarticlecamefromthefollowingsources:
IRSHacked,100,000taxaccountsbreached,USAToday;May26,2015.
CriminalsuseIRSwebsitetostealdataon104,000people,CNN;May26,2015.
IRSStatementonthe“GetTranscript”Application,IRS;May26,2015.
IRSbelievesmassivedatatheftoriginatedinRussia, CNN;June4,2015.
IRSHackBiggerThanFirstThought,NPR;August17,2015.
IRShackfarlargerthanfirstthought,USAToday;August18,2015.
TaxpayersAreSuingtheIRSOverThatHugeHack,OfCourse,Gizmodo;August26,2015.
IRShitwithlawsuitoverrecenttaxpayerdatahack,SlashGear;August26,2015.
IRSWebsite
3
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com