Remembering Ken Olsen – An IT Icon
March2011
Ken Olsen was my first boss. As a graduate student working as a
research assistant at MIT’s Lincoln Laboratory in 1957, I was
assigned to Ken to work on the first all-transistorized computer ever
attempted. I was under Ken’s supervision when he decided to start
his own company using the transistor technology he had developed
at Lincoln Labs. The company he founded was Digital Equipment
Corporation, which was to become in the late 1980s the second
largestcomputermanufacturernexttoIBM.
I kept in touch with Ken for several years after he founded DEC.
Throughout his career, he carried his personal style of management
that I had the privilege of witnessing. He was nurturing and fiercely
KenOlsen
loyal to his employees. During one visit, when he was showing me
credit:GordonCollege
around the old New England mill that was DEC’s first home, Ken
seemedtoknowvirtuallyeveryonebytheirfirstnameandonwhattheywereworking.
Through the PDP and VAX series of computers, it was Ken’s vision of interactivity that was a
powerful force in moving computing from centralized mainframes into the hands of people.
Though he passed away on February 6, 2011, at the age of 84, his legacy will be felt by all of us
foralongtimetocome.
Ken’s Early Years
Ken was born in Bridgeport, Connecticut, in 1926. As a young boy, he became enthralled with
electronics and spent a good deal of his time in his father’s basement workshop taking apart and
repairingradios.
He joined the Navy in World War II at the age of 18 and attended the Navy’s electronics school,
wherehelearnedhowtomaintainradar,sonar,andnavigationsystems.
On to MIT and Lincoln Laboratories
After the war, Ken entered MIT in 1947, where he
earned his bachelor’s and master’s degrees in
electrical engineering. Following that, he joined
MIT’s Lincoln Laboratory. One of his first jobs was
working on Whirlwind, an advanced computer for its
time. Whirlwind was a behemoth! It contained
10,000 vacuum tubes, occupied an entire floor of a
1
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

large building, and had a failure interval measured in days. Whirlwind grew into the Air Force’s
Semi-Automatic Ground Environment System (SAGE), which was intended to track and intercept
enemyaircraft.
Ken was then assigned to Lincoln Labs’ TX-0 project. TX-0 was the first successful attempt to
build a large,general purpose,transistorized digitalcomputer.Modeled afterWhirlwind, it was an
18-bit machine (two bits for instructions, 16 bits for address) with a 4K magnetic-core memory. It
fitinaroominsteadofrequiringanentirefloor.
It was when Ken became the manager of a group tasked with building a transistorized multiplier
that I, as a research assistant at MIT, started working for him. Ken made a breakthrough in
transistor-circuit packaging when he built logic circuits – gates, flip-flops, etc. – into plastic tubes
resembling vacuum tubes. These packages could then be plugged into backplanes resembling
theknownvacuum-tubetechnologyofthetime.
Digital Equipment Corporation
Feeling strongly that packaged transistor-logic circuits were a significant innovation for the
emergingcomputer technology, KenleftLincoln Labs in1957to begin his owncompany. He was
chided for giving up 70% of his new company for a paltry $70.000 from venture capital firm
American Research and Development. His new company was Digital Equipment Corporation,
anditbecamethefirstsuccessful,venture-backedcomputercompanyinhistory.
Ken set up operations in Maynard, Massachusetts,
inanoldmillthatwasanindustrialagerelic,where
blankets for the Union army had once been made.
Rather than continue with vacuum-tube-like
packaging, DEC moved to plug-in printed circuit
boards. These evolved into the company’s popular
lineof“flip-chips.”
In 1960, the company introduced its first computer,
the PDP-1 (Programmed Data Processor), which
wasbuiltusingDEC’sflip-chips.
The PDP-1 was soon followed in 1965 by the PDP-8. The PDP-8 was a
twelve-bit, desktop computer with 4k of memory, no operating system,
andanassembler,PAL.Itwasthefirstcomputertobemassproduced.At
a starting price of $18,000, the PDP-8 established minicomputers as a
major industry. It moved computing from the large corporate data centers
tosmall-andmedium-sizebusinesses.
Five years later, in 1970, DEC announced the PDP-11, a sixteen-bit
computer with 64K of memory. Until PCs were introduced, the PDP-11
and its successor, the 32-bit VAX (Virtual Address eXtension), became
themostpopularcomputersever.
DEC createdoneof thefirstsales forcestobebasedonsalaryrather thanoncommission.Ken’s
philosophywasthatsalespeopleshouldconcentrateonwhatthecustomerneededratherthanon
whatwasgoingtomakethemthemostmoney.
By the late 1980s, DEC was the second largest computer company in the world, next to IBM.
With operations in 95 countries, it had over 120,000 employees and generated $14 billion in
annualrevenues.Itrankedamongthemostprofitablecompaniesinthenation.
2
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

In Retrospect
DEC’sfortunesbegantofadeintheearly1990s.Thecompanywaslatetorecognizethegrowing
popularity of the smaller personal computers that were just entering the marketplace; and its
attempttocompetewithitsownpersonalcomputer,theRainbow,failed.
One of Ken’s famous misstatements was his pronouncement that “there is no reason for any
individual to have a computer in his home.” He later explained that his quote was taken out of
context.What he meant was that he couldn’t envision a day when computers would run people’s
lives.(Itseemsthathemayhavebeenwronghereaswell.)
Digital also resisted the market’s shift from proprietary hardware and software to the new
technology of open systems. Though it was a major early driver in interactive systems,
networking,andEthernet,DigitalseemedtoloseitswayintheInternetera.
In 1998, Compaq bought what was left of DEC. Compaq was in turn acquired by HP in 2002.
HP’s OpenVMS product line is the legacy of Ken Olsen. Though Digital is no longer around, it is
itsinnovationsininteractivitythatbroughtcomputerstothepeople.
Honored by Many
Ken received manyhonors during his life. In 1986, Fortune Magazine called him “America’s most
successfulentrepreneur.”TheTownofMaynarddeclaredJune17,2006,“KenOlsenDay.”
Ken was a trustee of Gordon College in Wenham,
Massachusetts. In September 2008, Gordon College
dedicated the 80,000 square foot Ken Olsen Science
Center.
People called Ken’s management style “management by
walking around.” Whether at The Mill or in sales offices
around the world, Ken took time to visit with and listen to
his employees. This led to a culture in which any
employee could talk to any other employee or manager –
the “open door” policy. The result was a fostering of
engineeringinnovation.
A wonderful look at Ken and his accomplishments can be found in two videos published by PC
Magazine on February 8, 2011, in an online article entitled Computing Pioneer Ken Olsen Dead
at 84. The videos can be found at http://www.pcmag.com/article2/0,2817,2379648,00.asp (view
thefirstvideotoseethesecondone).
Ken Olsen left us on February 6, 2011. Though he is gone, his legacy lives on. He was indeed
thefatherofthecomputer’ssecondgeneration–thetransistorizedcomputer.
3
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com