Can You Trust the Compute Cloud?
August2008
Thousands of small to medium businesses (and some large ones as well) use Amazon.com’s
services to implement their online presences. Amazon significantly extended these services
recently with AWS, the Amazon Web Services, which opens Amazon’s massive infrastructure to
its customers. Predominant among these services are S3, the Simple Storage Service, and EC2,
the Elastic Compute Cloud. S3 allows customers to store their data on Amazon’s massively-
redundant distributed database. EC2 provides server capacity on demand for the customer by
creating virtual machines that run on Amazon’s server infrastructure.1 These services are known
ascloudcomputing.
If theseservices should go down, thousands of businesses gooutof business duringthe outage.
And that is exactly what has happened this year. Amazon has racked up hours of downtime in
severalincidentsduringthepastsixmonths.
Can cloud computing be trusted? What can a business do to protect itself from outages over
which it has no control? Does cloud computing have a future?Weexplorethese questions inthis
article.
What is a Compute Cloud?
Building a data center is serious business. Companies must worryabout costs, facilities, staffing,
administration, security, availability, disasters, and many other factors. Given a commitment to
build its own data center, a company often finds that it is a victim of its own efforts. In today’s
competitive environment, there must be fast response to market pressures. New applications
mustbeputintoservicequickly,evenifonaprototypebasistotestnewapproaches.
However, the company’s data center is constrained by capacity and budget. New projects
compete with existing projects for valuable resources. Fast-moving market factors may require a
rapidresponsethatisoutsideofthebudgetingprocess.Canthedatacenteraccommodateanew
request? On what servers should it run? How long will it take to get management approval and
budget?
Werner Vogels, Amazon’s CTO, has said that if managing a massive data center isn’t a core
competency of your business, maybe you should get out of this business and pass the
responsibilitytosomeonewhohasthatcompetency.
LikeAmazon.
1HowMany9sinAmazon?,AvailabilityDigest;July2008.
1
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Vogels submits that Amazon has a massive computing infrastructure and over a decade of
experience managing it. Why not host a business’ applications on Amazon’s systems and let
Amazondoallof the work?Acompanycanmovemuchfaster atfar lower costs.Businesses can
design their own databases and can dynamically allocate only the server capacity required. Best
ofall,it’scheap!
This capability is known as “cloud computing.” Instead of a company managing its own data
center, it uses the services of a data utility. Just as an electric bill is determined by usage of
electricity, a data utility bill is determined by how much data is stored and by how much
computingcapacityisused.
ForresterResearchdefinescloudcomputingas:2
A pool of abstracted, highly scalable, and managed compute infrastructure capable of
hostingend-customerapplicationsandbilledbyconsumption.
ThisisexactlywhatAmazonisofferingwithitsS3andEC2services,amongothers.
Amazon’s Dismal Cloud-Computing Record
Amazon today is the leading provider of cloud computing. Cloud computing is used primarily by
small companies that do not have IT investments to manage. They are attracted by the very low
cost of computing compared to the equipment and personnel costs that they would incur if they
were to build their own data centers. Furthermore, they have near-infinite flexibility and are able
toincreaseordecreasetheirprocessingcapacityandstoragerequirementsvirtuallyon-the-fly.
However, Amazon’s compute cloud is still in its early stages. It is far from mature. Amazon is
reluctant even to provide service level agreements, though in the last year they started to offer a
rathertoothlessSLAfortheirS3service.
The lack of stability of the Amazon cloud has been dramatically demonstrated in the last six
months. In February, 2008,1 Amazon’s S3 service was overwhelmed by a flood of authorization
requestsandwasdownforoverthreehoursintheUnitedStatesandEurope.
Then in July of this year, S3 died again, this time for eight hours.3 In this case, Amazon reported
that the problem was due to communication problems between several of its components.
Though EC2 was not affected directly, the S3 failure prevented new virtual machines from being
registeredandexistingvirtualmachinesfrombeinglaunched.
The good news is that no data was lost. Amazon stores S3 data in several geographically-
distributed locations to ensure that there will be no data loss, even in the event of a disastrous
lossofanentiredatacenter.
The bad news is that thousands of online stores were down for hours. Per its SLA, Amazon
refunded hundreds of dollars in fees to companies to compensate them for perhaps hundreds of
thousandsofdollarsinlostrevenues.
Amazon’s infrastructure failures are not limited to its cloud-computing services. In June of this
year, Amazon suffered when its own online store went down for over three hours. Amazon’s only
explanation was that its “systems are very complex and on rare occasions … may experience
problems.”
OmMalik,awell-knowntechnologyauthor,wrotethefollowingafterthelatestAmazondebacle:
2IsCloudComputingReadyfortheEnterprise?,ForresterResearch; March7,2008.
3MoreoutageshitAmazon’sS3storageservice,Networkworld.com;July21,2008.
2
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

“But even as cloud computing starts to gain traction with companies … and most of our
businessandcommunicationactivitiesareshiftingonline,webservicesarestillfragile,inpart
becausewearestillusingtechnologiesbuiltforamuchlessstrenuousweb.”
In short, he submits that the compute cloud is fragile. Amazon’s experiences support that
conjecture.
What’s a Small Business To Do?
The cost, administration, and flexibility arguments for cloud computing use by small companies
are compelling. On the other hand, the lack of high availability is likely to be a great concern for
many.
Some companies are willing to accept reduced availability in return for cloud computing’s
advantages. SmugMug, a major photo and video storage site, said the following after Amazon’s
latestoutage:4
“Every component SmugMug has ever used, whether it’s networking providers, datacenter
providers, software, servers, storage, or even people, has let us down at one point or
another. It’s the nature of the game, and our job is to handle these problems and outages as
bestwecan.”
It appears that SmugMug feels that it can be down occasionally because the primary impact is
theunavailabilityofmaterialthatitscustomershavestoredonitssite.
However, those who lose significant revenue when their site is down or who feel that their
services are more critical will probably disagree with this. What is needed for critical applications
are:
 Redundancysothatbackupfacilitiescanbeemployedfollowingacloudfailure.
 Goodcommunicationfrom thecloud provider concerningthestatus of thecomputecloud
duringanoutage.
 Customer monitoring of the compute cloud so that problems can be isolated to the cloud
ortothecustomer’ssystems.
Redundancy
If high availability is to be achieved with cloud computing, the preferred solution is the same as it
is with any computing infrastructure – redundancy. If the cloud goes down, you must have a
backup plan. Typically, this means that you should have a backup site to which you can switch
duringtheoutagetoprovideatleasttheminimumservicesthatyourbusinessrequires.
An example of a company with a backup plan is Mediafed.5 Mediafed provides traffic analysis of
RSS (Really Simple Syndication) feeds to European media companies such as BBC and
LeMonde. The company uses two cloud providers side-by-side – Amazon and UK-based
Flexiscale. Both clouds run at the same time, backing each other up. Customers are split
between the two clouds, and impacted customers can be quickly switched over to the surviving
cloudintheeventofacloudoutage.MediafedsurvivedtheAmazonS3failurewithnoproblem.
4Amazon’sS3experiencesoutage,News.cnet.com;July20,2008.
5S3outage:timetodoubleup,PhilWainewright,blogs.zdnet.com/SAAS/;July21,2008.
3
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Amazon’sNewAvailabilityZones
Recognizingtheneedfor redundancyfor criticalapplications, Amazonintroducedthis pastMarch
apowerfulredundancyoption–AvailabilityZonesandElasticIPAddresses.
Amazon divides the world into geographic regions. Each region contains several Availability
Zones. Each Availability Zone is a distinct location within a region and is insulated from faults in
other Availability Zones. Communication connections are provided between the Availability
Zones, which are close enough together so that communication latency should not be a
significant factor in application performance (round-trip communication latency between two
AvailabilityZones500milesapartisabouttwentymilliseconds).
A customer can select an Availability Zone to launch an instance of his application. He can also
launchabackupinstance inanother AvailabilityZone inthesameregion. Oneof theseinstances
is the primary instance. The database in the backup instance is kept synchronized with the
primarydatadatabaseviadatareplication.
Amazon’s Elastic IP Addresses allow the customer to dynamically associate an IP address with
an instance of his application. In normal operation, the IP address points to the primary instance
of his application. However, should the primary instance fail, user requests can be rapidly
switchedtothebackupinstance.
Following a primary failure, the backup database will be brought into a state of consistency. The
backup applications will be started and will connect to the backup database. The backup
application instance will assume the IP addresses used bycustomers, and the application will be
back up and running. This process should take minutes compared to the hours of downtime
experiencedduringAmazon’srecentoutages.
If desired, the new primary instance can at this time start another backup instance in a surviving
AvailabilityZone.
Communication
A common problem with cloud computing and other Software as a Service offerings is
communication of status during outages. Following Amazon’s first outage in February, there was
agreatoutcryfromitscustomerbaseduetothelackofinformationforthcomingfromAmazon.
Recognizing the need for up-to-date status information concerning its cloud, Amazon
implemented a web-based cloud-health dashboard. This facility played a major factor in helping
customersfollowingitsJulyoutage.
CloudMonitoring
Another problem thathas surfacedas aresult of Amazon’s outages is the needfor acompanyto
determine the root cause of an outage. Many companies use S3 and EC2 as an adjunct to their
systems. When Amazon’s cloud failed, they had no idea where the problem was. Was it in their
systems, in Amazon’s systems, or in some other systems upon which they may have been
dependent?
This led to a realization that facilities must be provided by the company to monitor the health of
the cloud so that the nature of a problem can be determined and that restoration efforts can be
focused on the true problem. Some companies have built their own monitoring tools to fill this
need.
4
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Inaddition,Hyperic,Inc.(www.hyperic.com),ayoung companyprovidingopen-sourcemonitoring
andmanagementsoftwareforwebinfrastructure,hasannounceditsproductHypericCloudStatus
thatwillprovideanindependentviewofthehealthandperformanceofAmazon’scloud.
Maybe a Rainbow After the Cloudburst
The realization today is that cloud computing does not yet meet enterprise standards for
information technology. It does not provide for much in the way of administration and monitoring
by the user, and its availability is certainly less than desirable. In Amazon’s defense, it should be
notedthatitis apioneer in cloudcomputing.Thoughit hasmadetremendous strides inthis area,
itisalwaysthepioneerthatgetsthearrowsinhisbackside.
InacompanionblogtoOmMalik’sstatementreferencedearlier,LarryDignansaid:6
“Andlikeanycompanywrestlingwithlegacysystems,cloud-computingvendorswilldustoffa
tired playbook. The solutions will be the usual: Relegate legacy systems to plumbing and
createmoreservicesandapplicationstokeepinfrastructurecurrent.Inotherwords,thecloud
will likely become more of a rat’s nest. What’s scary about that prognosis is the cloud is
alreadytoocomplicatedsinceit’sbuiltoncreakyinfrastructure.”
What is needed is a major effort to reinvent Web services that can reliably and adequately
supportcloudcomputing.Thisisspawningmajorresearcheffortstodojustthat.
For instance, HP, Intel, and Yahoo are joining other government and academic institutions to
initiate a large-scale research project to develop a more robust cloud-computing infrastructure.7
Joined by the Infocomm Development Authority (IDA) of Singapore, the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign in conjunction with the National Science Foundation, and Karlsruhe Institute
of Technology of Germany, these six participants will host a multidata-center compute cloud
spanning three continents for experimentation and research into cloud computing. Based largely
onIntelprocessorsandHPcomputers,eachofthesixdatacentersinthecloud willcontain1,000
to4,000processingcores.
The project will revolve around open-source distributed technology developed by the Apache
Hadoop project,8 to which Yahoo is the major contributor. It will also use Pig, a parallel
programminglanguagedevelopedbyYahoo.
IBM and Google are also working on a major cloud-computing research program with several
major universities. They plan to roll out their network over the next year. Their compute cloud will
also be based on Hadoop running on Linux and will use Xen for server virtualization. IBM says
that cloud computing will allow it to reach small and medium businesses, which represent $500
billioninrevenuesandwhichIBMhastroubleservingprofitablythroughitsusualsaleschannels.
It is also reported that Microsoft and AT&T are pursuing their own research projects in cloud
computing.
Where Do We Go From Here?
Many experts believe that cloud computing will be the dominant IT delivery model of the future.
However,basedoncurrentexperience,thistechnologyhasalongwaytogo.
The cloud computing provider that is furthest along is clearly Amazon with its Amazon Web
Services. Amazon’s efforts have to date been the major factor in the maturing of this technology.
6
Amazon’sS3outage:Isthecloudtoocomplicated?LarryDignan,blogs.zdnet.com;July21,2008.
7HP,Intel,YahooJoinGovernment,AcademiaInCloudComputingResearch,informationweek.com;July29,2008.
8Wheredidthename“Hadoop”comefrom?Itisthenameofthedevelpor’schild’sstuffedelephant.
5
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Thecommercialsuccessofits offeringshasspurredseveralmajorinternationalresearchprojects
to bring cloud computing up to enterprise standards. With the massive efforts being put into this
initiative,itisquitepossiblethatcloudcomputingwillprovideacomputingutilitythatwilltransform
theITindustry.
Until then, users should introduce facilities to monitor the health of their cloud provider so that
they can properly identify the source of problems. In addition, businesses that want to take
advantage of the low cost, simple administration, and flexibilityof cloud computing must consider
their availability needs. In many cases, the cloud must be backed up with a redundant cloud or
equivalent. Amazon now provides Availability Zones to meet this need, though they are at this
pointintimetoonewtojudgetheireffectiveness.
6
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
