 Hypoxic air meets the EPA’s Significant New Alternatives Policy, which states that
hypoxicair“doesnotrequirefurtherreviewandcanbemarketed.”
 HypoxicairmeetsANSIrequirementsforsufficientoxygen.
 The Fire Prevention Association of Great Britain has endorsed the health and safety of
hypoxicfireprevention.
OSHABegstoDiffer
Onenaysayer is OSHA,theU.S.Occupational Safetyand Health Administration. Inearly2008, it
denied a request by FirePASS for a permanent variance of FirePASS’s hypoxic air system.
OSHA considers an oxygen concentration of less than 19.5% to be hazardous, and it requires
peopleworkinginsuchanatmospheretohavesupplementaloxygen.
InresponsetoFirePASS’srequest,OSHAsaidinpart:3
“Human beings . . . begin to suffer adverse health effects when the oxygen level of their
breathingair drops below[19.5percentoxygen]....Atconcentrations of 16to19.5percent,
workersengagedinanyform ofexertioncanrapidlybecomesymptomaticastheirtissuesfail
to obtain the oxygen necessary to function properly . . . . Increased breathing rates,
accelerated heartbeats, and impaired thinking or coordination occur more quickly in an
oxygen-deficientenvironment.”
AltitudeSickness
Altitude sickness affects every human being.4 The only difference is at what altitude? Some
peoplefeelsymptomsiftheyexertthemselvesat8,000feet.Otherscanworkhardat15,000feet.
Inmostcases,people will acclimateover a period of afew days to higher altitudes.Symptoms of
altitude sickness include headache, nausea, and fatigue. A skier from New York skiing at Wolf
Creek, Colorado – altitude 10,000 to 12,000 feet – will most likely feel poorly the first day or two
(theauthordid).
However, exertion is a major factor. Being sedentary at 8,000 feet affects almost no one, as is
evidencedbythefactthatweflycommerciallyinanairplanepressurizedatthisaltitude.
In extreme cases, serious consequences can appear at higher altitudes. They include HAPE
(high-altitude pulmonary edema) and HACE (high-altitude cerebral edema), potentially fatal
conditions that cause fluid to accumulate in the lungs or brain, respectively. HAPE and HACE
generallyaffectthosetryingtoscalethehighestmountains.
Most studies of altitude sickness have concentrated on the partial pressure of oxygen – the
decrease of oxygen at higher altitudes. It appears that little research has been done on the
effects of oxygen concentration. Are they the same? Is the effect of being at 8,000 feet in normal
air different from being in an hypoxic sea-level atmosphere with the amount of oxygen equivalent
to8,000feet?Moreresearchisneededtoanswerthisquestion.
3OSHAlettertoSenatorJohnSununu;May1,2008.
http://www.osha.gov/pls/oshaweb/owadisp.show_document?p_table=interpretations&p_id=27004
4www.altitude.org
4
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Considerations and Compromises
Clearly, the jury is still out when it comes to the human safety of hypoxic atmospheres. Most
agencies seem to agree that they are safe. OSHA seems to be the only holdout; but without
OSHA certification, many engineers may not be willing or may not be able to recommend an
hypoxic fire-prevention system in the U.S. On the other hand, there are hundreds of systems
installedworldwide;andnoproblemshavebeenreported.
If you are interested in hypoxic fire prevention but want to approach it cautiously, consider the
followingsteps.
Segregation
You can segregate the areas that require fire prevention from the areas in which people will
normally be operating. For instance, battery rooms and power-transfer rooms could be flooded
with hypoxic air since there is no need for permanent personnel in these areas. The equipment
rooms in data centers – servers, storage arrays, network devices – can be in a room isolated
from the consoles manned by the system operators. Should someone need to enter an hypoxic
room,itwillonlybeforalimitedamountoftime.
MedicalConditions
If there is a concern about an employee’s physical ability to handle an hypoxic environment,
FirePASSsuggeststhefollowingcautionarysteps:
 Peoplebetweenthe agesof40and 65should checktheir oxyhemoglobin(SPO2)levelsbya
pulse oximeterbefore entering the environmentand should have areading of95%orabove.
 Employeesinthe ages40-65 should wearapulse oximeterforthe firstweekto monitorthe
SPO2.
 Employeesmustevacuate the environmentiftheirSPO2levelsdrop below 87%.
 Employeeswho sufferfrom respiratorydiseases, suchas emphysemaorsevere asthma,
should notenterthisenvironmentwithoutgetting permissionfromtheirdoctorsorshould
wearasupplementaloxygen maskprovided bythe employer.
 Ifanemployee feelsshortnessofbreathorlightheadednessoranyotherunusualsymptoms,
thatemployee should step outofthe environmentimmediately.
Anexcellentdetailing ofhealthand safety considerationsforhypoxicaircanbe foundinthe British
Standards Institution(BSI)PubliclyAvailable Specification PAS95:210, entitled “HypoxicFire
PreventionSystemsforOccupiable Spaces.”5
SupplementalOxygen
If there is a concern for an employee who may be susceptible to altitude sickness
either becauseof amedicalconditionor because of havingtospendlong periods in
anhypoxicenvironment,thatpersonshouldbeequippedwithsupplementaloxygen.
This typically involves strapping on a small oxygen bottle and breathing oxygen
eitherviaafacemask oranasalcannula.Afacemaskcanberestrictive.Acannula
5http://www.bafsa.org.uk/pdfs/snews/00000939.pdf
5
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

provides a pair of tubes feeding oxygen directly into the nasal passages and is much less
restrictive.Cannulasaretypicallyusedbypilotsflyinginunpressurizedaircraftathighaltitudes.
Summary
Data center fires don’t have to happen. They can be prevented by flooding the data center with
hypoxic air. Several companies market hypoxic fire-prevention systems, and successful
installationsabound.
There continues to be some concern about the safety of these systems so far as humans are
concerned. However, the consensus seems to be that they are safe for healthy humans who are
not required to perform physically exhausting work in the hypoxic environment. Several
recommendations exist to identify those individuals who may be susceptible and actions to take
toprotectthem.
A study by the Institute and Outpatient Clinic for Occupational and Environmental Medicine
concludes:6
“Preliminaryevidence suggests that working environments with low oxygen concentrations to
a minimum of 13% and normal barometric pressure do not impose a health hazard, provided
that precautions are observed, comprising medical examinations and limitation of exposure
time. However, evidence is limited, particularly with regard to workers performing strenuous
tasks or having various diseases. Therefore, close monitoring of the health problems of
peopleworkinginlow-oxygenatmospheresisnecessary.”
Epilogue
In the Naval Research Laboratory article cited earlier, the author, Homer Carhart, concluded with
aninterestingobservationthatwereproducehere:
”In view of the extreme sensitivity of fires to oxygen concentration, one has to wonder why
the Earth’s atmosphere has 21% oxygen and was it ever thus? How fortuitous this value is,
and what does it mean for the development of humankind and civilization? What if it were
something slightly different, such as 23%? Or 19%? Would mankind have evolved to this
present state of civilization and culture? Probably not, because man’s technological
development has been too closely related and dependent on fire; and fire behaviour under
these other concentrations of oxygen is sufficiently different to impact markedly on its use
andcontrol.
“Also, there is ample evidence that the Earth’s early atmosphere was a reducing one, not an
oxidizing one as it is now. How and why did it change?Why did it stop at 21%? From man’s
standpoint, how lucky, because in terms of the Earth’s history, Homo Sapiens is such a
Johnny-come-ever-so-lately that by the time he/she showed up, the oxygen had long
flattened out at 21%; and mankind could evolve in comfort at that value. But, as shown
above, Home Sapiens is now sufficiently sapient to take advantage of greater control of at
least unwanted fires. And, in view of our still massive fire losses (5,000 deaths/year in the
U.S.alone),shouldbedoingmorethanhe/sheis.”
Acknowledgement
Thankstooursubscriber,OleJacobEide,forpointingustothistechnology.
6AngererP,NowakD.,Workinginpermanenthypoxiaforfireprotection-impactonhealth;March2003.
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12733081
6
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com
