Configuring to Meet a Performance SLA – Part 5:
Multiple Servers with General Service Times
April2009
An SLA often contains a performance specification in the form of “99% of all transactions will
complete in less than 50 msec.” Whether or not we can meet this specification is the SLA
question.
In Part 4 of this series on meeting a performance SLA specification, we used the Gamma
distribution to provide a powerful method for determining the probabilitythat the response time of
aserver withgeneralservicetimes willbelessthana specifiedamount.Alternatively, weshowed
how to calculate the response time that could be achieved with a certain probability.We reduced
theserathercomplexcalculationstoasetofchartsandspreadsheets.
However, most systems comprise aset of servers acting in tandem through which an event must
pass before a response to that event is generated. Each of these servers could have a different
distribution of service times and could be carrying different loads. How do we calculate the
performanceSLAparametersforsuchacomplexsystem?
Inthisarticle,weshowhowtousetheresultsofthepreviousarticlestosolvethisproblem.
The Response Time of Servers with General Service-Time Distributions
InPart3, wesolvedtheSLAproblem for servers with exponentialservicetimes.InPart4, wedid
soforserverswithgeneralservicetimes.WereviewPart4here.
Thesolutionfor generalservicetimes depends upontheGammadistribution.Withits roots inthe
early days of telephony, the Gamma distribution has been shown to be a surprisingly good
approximationtothedistributionofresponsetimesinqueuingsystems.
TheGammadistributionprovidesitsapproximationtotheresponse-timedistributionbasedsimply
on the knowledge of the response time’s mean and variance. The problem then reduces to the
determinationofthismeanandvariance.
In the general case, there is no easy wayto do this. The response-timemean and variance must
be measured using an operational system with a known average service time and running under
a specified load. In Part 4, we charted this relationship, repeated here as Figures 1a and 1b.
Figure1bisanexplosionofthehigherprobabilitiesshowninFigure1a.
These figures show the probability that the response time will be less than some specified
maximumtime,T ,where
m
1
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

T =themaximumresponsetimespecifiedbytheSLA.
m
The Gamma distribution requires only one parameter, R, which is the ratio of the square of the
averageresponsetimetothevarianceoftheresponsetime:
2
T
R r (1)
var(T)
r
where
T =responsetime
r
T =averageresponsetime
r
var(T) =varianceoftheresponsetime
r
1.00
6
4
0.98
3
0.96
0.94
probability
0.92
(T r Tm) Tm/Tr = 2
0.90
0.88
0.86
0.84
1 2 3 4 5 6
R=(2T)2/var(T)
R = T r/ var(Tr)
r r
AllowableVariancetoMeetSLA
Figure1a
1.000
6
0.995
5
4
probability
0.990
(Tr <Tm)
Tm/Tr =3
0.985
0.980
1 2 3 4 5 6
2
RR==T( rT r/)2v/vaar(r(TTrr))
AllowableVariancetoMeetSLA
Figure1b
2
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Each curve in these figures represents a ratio of the maximum response time to the average
response time,T /T . For instance, the curve for T /T = 3 represents those probability values
m r m r
fortheresponsetimebeinglessthanthreeaverageresponsetimesasafunctionofR.
As an example, let us measure the response-time distribution of some server. It has an average
servicetimeof5msec.,andwerunitataloadof50%.Wefindthattheaverageresponsetimeat
50% load is 10 msec., and its variance is 40 (a standard deviation of 6.3 msec.). Thus, R is
102/40=2.5.From Figure1b,weseethattheresponsetimeforthisserver willbelessthanthree
averageresponsetimes (30msec.) 99% of thetime.Thus,wecanstatethat 99% of allresponse
timeswillbelessthan30msec.whentheserverisrunningata50%load.
However, having to make a physical measurement of the response times of a server under load
may be difficult or impractical. Fortunately, there are several common cases in which the mean
and variance can be calculated if the service-time distribution, average service time, and server
load are known. These service-time distributions include the exponential distribution, the uniform
distribution, and the constant distribution. For such distributions, the mean and variance of the
response times as a function of mean service time and server load were given in Part 4 and are
asfollows:
 forexponentialservicetimes:
T
T  s
r (1L)
(2)
T2
var(T) s
r (1L)2
 foruniformservicetimes:
T  L
T r  (1s L) 1 3

(3)
T2 1 L2 
var(T) s   
r (1L)2 3 9 
 forconstantservicetimes:
T  L
T r  (1s L) 1 2

(4)
T2 L L2 
var(T) s   
r (1L)2 3 12
where
T istheaverageservicetimefortheserver
s
Listheloadontheserver(itsutilization)
Spreadsheets for the probability of response times and Equations (2), (3), and (4) may be found
athttp://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0403/composite_performance_sla.xls.
3
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Response-Time Distributions for Multiple Servers
Often, systems comprise a series of servers working in tandem, each having different
characteristics – different service-time distributions, different capacities, and different loads. An
event (such as a transaction) passes through each of these servers before generating a
response.
Though the techniques summarized above can predict the response-time distribution for each of
the servers, what is reallydesired is the response-time distribution for the set of servers taken as
awhole.
Thisproblemissolvedbasedonthreerules:
1. The mean of the sum of independent variables is the sum of their means. If z = x + y,
then
z xy
wheretheoverbardenotes“mean.”
2. The variance of the sum of independent variables is the sum of their variances.1 Using
theabovedefinitionofz,
var(z)=var(x+y)=var(x)+var(y)
3. If two or more variables follow a Gamma distribution, the sum of these variables also
followsaGammadistribution.2
Therefore, if we can determine the mean and variance of each of the servers in the tandem
string, we simply need to add those means and variances to find the value of R for the system.
WecanthenusetheabovetechniquestoanswertheSLAquestion.
As an example, consider the system of Figure 2, in which incoming events contained in fixed-
length messages are stored temporarily on disk, where they are queued until they are serviced.
An Extract Server process reads the next event from the disk and sends it over a communication
channeltoanEventServerthatwillprocessit.
15,000rpm -- CommunicationServer--
disk 2mb/sec.
communicationline
Extract Event
100events/sec.
Server Server
uniformdistribution constantdistribution exponentialdistribution
servicetime=2msec. 1,000KBmessages servicetime=5msec.
capacity=500events/sec. servicetime=4msec. capacity=200events/
load=0.2 capacity=250events/sec. sec.
load=0.4 load=0.5
A Complex Multiple Server
Figure 2
1W. H. Highleyman, Chapter 4, Basic Performance Concepts, pg 97, Performance Analysis of TransactionProcessing
Systems,Prentice-Hall;1989.
2JamesMartin,Chapter26,ProbabilityandQueuingTheory,pg.389,DesignofReal-TimeComputerSystems,Prentice-
Hall;1967.
4
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Inthissystemtherearethreeservers:
1. The Extract Server reads the next event from the disk. Since events are stored randomly
on the disk, the server must wait for the disk to rotate until that event is under the read
head. With equal probability, this delay time can be anywhere from zero to n
milliseconds, where n is the time that it takes for the disk to make one revolution. Thus,
theservicetimeforthisserverisuniformlydistributedwithameanservicetimeofn/2.
2. The Communication Server sends the event over the communication line. Since the
messages are fixed length, the service time of the Communication Server is constant
(ignoringtheeffectofretransmissionsduetotransmissionerrors).
3. TheEventServerprocessestheevent.Weassumethatitsservicetimeisexponential.
Figure2providesparametersfortheseservers:
 Theeventrateis100eventspersecond.
 The disk rotates at 15,000 rpm. Thus, its rotational latency is 4 msec. The processing
time of the Extract Server doing the extraction is measured in microseconds and can be
ignored. Therefore, the mean service time of the Extract Server is 2 milliseconds. Its
capacity is 500 events per second. At 100 events per second, it is carrying a load of
100/500=0.2.
 The event message size is 1,000 kilobytes (8,000 kilobits). The communication line
transmits at 2 megabits per second. Therefore, the service time of the Communication
Server is 4 msec.; and it can handle 250 event messages per second. At 100 events per
second,itiscarryingaloadof100/250=0.4.
 The Event Server has an exponentially-distributed service time with a mean service time
of 5 milliseconds. It has a capacity of 200 events per second and is 50% loaded at an
eventrateof100eventspersecond.
Using the spreadsheet referenced above, the following results are obtained for the average
responsetimeandtheresponsetimevariance:
Server ServiceTime MeanService Load MeanResponse Response
Distribution Time(msec.) Time(msec.) TimeVariance
Extract uniform 2 0.2 2 .000002
Communications constant 4 0.4 5 .000005
Event exponential 5 0.5 10 .000100
Total 17 .000107
Response-TimeParametersfortheServerComplexofFigure2
Table1
Summing these gives us a system mean response time of 17 msec. and a variance of .000107.
Thus,theGammaparameterRforthissystemis(.017)2/.000107=2.70.
5
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

From Figure1bor from thespreadsheet, wesee,for example,that99% of allresponsetimes will
be less than 50 msec. (T /T = 2.92 from the spreadsheet). 95% will be less than 37 msec.
m r
(T /T =2.16).
m r
The maximum response time/probability curve for this example is given in Figure 3. From this
curve, we can answer the question of what is the probability that a response will occur in less
thanaspecifiedtime.
If after going through this exercise, it is found that the SLA specification is not met, the only
recourse (short of renegotiating the SLA) is to use faster servers – moving to a memory-resident
input queue with disk backup, to a higher bandwidth communication line, or to a faster event
server, for instance. The values given in Table 1 can be useful for deciding where to make the
improvementsinthesystem.Theabovecalculationcanthenberepeatedtoverifytheresults.
Summary
The Gamma distribution of a variable that is the sum of independent variables is itself a Gamma
distribution. For complex systems of tandem servers with differing characteristics, this fact allows
us to easily answer the SLA question, “What is the probability that the response time will be less
thanaspecifiedamount?”IftheSLAspecificationcannotbemet,thedetailsoftheanalysisserve
asavaluableroadmaptotheservermodificationsrequiredtomeettheSLA.
If the distribution of a server in the tandem configuration is unknown, an assumption of an
exponentialdistributionisalwaysconservative.
ThechartsofFigures1aand1bcanbeusedtoobtainapproximateresults.Moreaccurateresults
canthenbeobtainedfromthereferencedspreadsheet.
6
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com