Australia’s Telstra Downed by Fat Finger
March2016
A human error resulted in about 10% of the customers of Australia’s telecommunications
company Telstra losing all mobile, home phone, and digital services in February 2016.
Services were not restored for four hours. As we have mentioned in the Digest several times, the outage
emphasizes the fact that critical human actions always should be undertaken by two people – one to do
andonetocheck.
Telstra
Telstra Corporation Limited is Australia’s largest telecommunications and media company. It
provides voice, mobile, and Internet services as well as pay television and other entertainment
products. It builds and operates the telecommunications networks used to deliver these
services.Itsname,“Telstra,”isderivedfromthewordsTelecommunicationsAustralia.
Telstra serves about 17 million business and individual customers throughout Australia – over 70% of
Australia’spopulation.
The Telstra Network
The Telstra network provides 2G, 3G, and 4G mobile services as well as ADSL1 and landline home-
telephone services. Customers are connected to its network via ten major connection points called
“nodes.” Everycustomer connects tooneof thenodes inthenetwork.Thenodes hostallof thehardware
necessary to provide Telstra’s voice and data services. They connect customers to Telstra’s nationwide
digitalandvoicenetworks.
The nodes are engineered to provide a great deal of redundancy. Should a few nodes go offline, the
remaining nodes can continue to operate as normal and provide all Telstra customers with ongoing
network services. Under normal circumstances, three or four nodes can be offline for maintenance; and
therewillbenoimpactonTelstra’stelecommunicationservices.
A Minor Maintenance Procedure Gone Wrong
That is, until noon on February 9, 2016. One of the nodes in the Telstra network was not performing
correctly,thoughthefaultwasnotcritical.ATelstraengineertook thenodedownformaintenance,buthe
failed to follow the correct procedure for rerouting traffic. Rather than transferring the customers
connected to that node to other nodes in the network, he reconnected them to the malfunctioning node.
Unfortunately, there was not a second person monitoring his actions to ensure that he did not make a
mistake.
1Asymmetricdigitalsubscriberline(ADSL)isatypeofdigitalsubscriberlinetechnologythatenablesfasterdatatransmissionover
coppertelephonelinesthanaconventionalvoice-bandmodemcanprovide.
1
©2016SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Suddenly, 10% of Telstra’s customers – about 1.5 million businesses and individuals – were without
mobile service or home telephone service. They could not access their data. They could not make calls,
browsetheInternet,orchecksocialmedia.
Customers Without Communication Capability for Hours
The outages mainly affected Australia’s largest cities,
including Sydney, Brisbane, Perth, Adelaide, Hobart (the
capital of Australia’s southern island state of Tasmania),
and large regions around Sydney, Melbourne, and in the
stateofQueensland.
The problems were compounded by the fact that outdated
information was being shown on Telstra’s service status
pageduetooverwhelmingdemand.
Service started to be restored around 2 PM, but it wasn’t
completely restored until after 4 PM, leaving many
businesses and individuals without communication
capabilityforuptofourhours.
Two Days Later – ASecond Outage
Adding insult to injury, just two days later, Telstra suffered a second outage. Although not fat-finger
related, the outage impacted hundreds of websites hosted by Bluehost, HostGator, and HostMonitor.
Affected businesses lost access not only to their own email accounts but also to their online customers
andotherusers.
Telstra blamed the outage on offshore sections of the Internet. However, a U.S-based host provider said
theproblemwasatTelstra’send.
Summary
Fortunately, those customers that were affected by the fat finger outage still were able to contact
emergencyservices.
Telstra offered a free day of digital access to all customers as an apology. The company may be
responsible for covering the costs of customers who suffered financially due to the outage. Estimates
placethecostofcompensationinthemillionsofAustraliandollars.
Telstraconstantlystresses in its marketingmessages thesize and dependabilityof its network.However,
itisclearthatTelstra’snetworkisaspronetofailureasanyothernetwork.
This outage is an example of a point that we continually make in the Availability Digest.2 Redundancy is
the basis of reliability. But humans need redundancy also. If an operation represents a possible single
point of failure, two people should be involved in the undertaking – one to perform the operation and the
other toverifythatthe operationis performedproperly. If Telstrahademployed humanredundancyinthe
fatfingercase,theerrorwouldhavebeencaughtandcorrectedbefore1.5millioncustomerssuffered.
2Help!MyDataCenterisDown!–Part7:LessonsLearned,AvailabilityDigest;April2012.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0704/data_center_outages-lessons.pdf
TripleHumanWhammy–NYSE,UA,WSJ,AvailabilityDigest;July2015.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/1007/human_whammy.pdf
2
©2016SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Telstra’s level of redundancy was questioned by another incident that occurred a few years earlier. A
massive fire in Telstra’s Warrnambool exchange in 2012 knocked out several important services,
including ATMs. More than 100,000 people were affected, and the outage cost the communitymore than
A$400,000 per day for twenty days. Those affected were vocal in their criticism of Telstra for not having
thesystemredundancythatwouldhaveallowedaquickrecoveryofservices.
Acknowledgements
Materialforthisarticlewastakenfromthefollowingsources:
‘Embarrassing’humanerrorbehindnationalTelstraoutage,ITNews;February9,2016.
Telstrasuffersnetworkoutage,news.com.au;February9,2016.
Telstrablamesmajornetworkoutageonhumanerror,DatacenterDynamics;February10,2016.
Telstra outage: manager connected customers to faulty node in ‘embarrassing error’, The Sydney
MorningHerald;February10,2016.
Telstrahitbysecondoutageintwodays,news.com.au;February11,2016.
Telstraoutageshowscustomerspayextraforfalsepeaceofmind,FinancialReview;February15,2016.
Telstra,Wilipedia.
3
©2016SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com