Stratus’ Avance Brings Availability to the Edge
February2009
Business continuity has not yet been extended to the Edge. What is the Edge? It is everything
outsideofthecorporatedatacenteruponwhichtheIT
services of a company rely. These are the branch
officesofanenterprise–thebank branches,theretail the
stores,thesalesoffices. Edge
branch branch
IT services in a branch (or in any small to medium-
sized business, for that matter) are typically provided branch
byone or morelocalservers hidden in acloset.If one corporate
of these servers goes down, the operations of the datacenter
branch or small business can be seriously hampered
until the failed server is restored to service. This can branch
branch
take hours or days, and such an outage certainly
represents more than an inconvenience to the
company and to its customers. However, the costs
associated with such downtime often do not warrant branch
the expense of providing fault tolerance at these
locations.
Avance™, from Stratus Technologies (www.stratus.com), seeks to overcome this problem.
Avance1bringshighavailabilitytotheEdge.Italsobringsanaddedcapability–virtualization.Not
onlycantheservers sittinginthatclosetbehighlyavailable,butthe various applications canalso
run on virtual machines hosted by a single, highly-available server, perhaps reducing branch IT
costssignificantly.
Announced on June 10th, 2008, Avance provides an out-of-the-box, fault-tolerant virtualization
solution with no high-availability or virtualization skills required of the operations staff. No special
hardware is required – it runs on a pair of standard x86 servers interconnected by an Ethernet
link. One server acts as the primary node and the other as its backup node. From a deployment
andmanagementperspective, Avancecreates asingle-system imagesothatthe operations staff
seesonlyasingleserver.
Using the open-source Xen hypervisor to provide a virtualized environment, Avance supports
both Windows and Linux virtual machines (VMs). Avance continually monitors the health of the
1“Avance”isFrenchfor“advance.”Inaddition,the“AV”signifiesavailabilityandvirtualization.
1
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

physical servers and the virtual machines running on them. It takes immediate and automatic
correctiveactionifitdetectsafault.Thebackupserverseamlesslytakesoverthefunctionsofthe
faultyVM or processor for mostfaults. In the worst case, a catastrophic server crash can take up
to two minutes to recover. Avance provides over four 9s of availability (less than an hour of
downtimeperyear).
Planned downtime is eliminated as upgrades can be rolled through the system one node at a
time.
Avance was awarded the 2009 Technology of the Year Award by InfoWorld in the category of
PlatformsandVirtualization.
Where Does Avance Fit?
Avance is applicable to any environment in which the availability of data-processing services is
critical but in which the cost of downtime does not warrant a fully fault-tolerant solution. These
environments include corporate branches, ISV products, and small to medium businesses
(SMBs).
In addition to high availability, Avance allows environments that host multiple servers to reduce
theirnumberofserversbyconsolidatingthemasvirtualmachinesontoavirtualizedhostserver.
EdgeApplications
Edge applications are the extensions to a data center. Running in a remote location, they
exchangeinformationwiththedatacenter.Suchlocationsinclude:
 bankbranches  departments
 retailstores  salesoffices
 manufacturingfacilities  distributionhubs
 distributedwarehouses  hospitalclinicalsystems
VerticalMarkets
ISVs (independent software vendors) provide a plethora of products to various business areas.
Productsincludethosethatsupportlegaloffices,medicalpractices,healthcare,andpublicsafety
(911,fire,police,andemergencymedicalservices).
SmalltoMediumBusinesses(SMBs)
Any SMB that has a number of general-purpose servers, each running its own application, can
benefitfromthehighavailabilityandvirtualizationofAvance.
DataCenters
Avanceevenhasapplicationtodata-centerservicesthatarenotmission-criticaltotheenterprise.
Ineffect,Avancereducestheseverepainofdowntimetomilddiscomfort.
2
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

The Avance Architecture
Hardware
Avanceis asoftwareproductthatrequires twoindustry-standardx86servers interconnectedbya
dedicatedEthernetcable.That’sit.Nostorageareanetwork (SAN)isrequired–Avanceusesthe
localdirect-attacheddisksofeachserver.
The servers must be certified by Stratus but in principle can be any server supported by the Xen
hypervisor.Currently,mostDellandHPserversarecertifiedforusebyAvance.
Avance creates a single-system image of the server pair. One server (arbitrarily chosen initially
by Avance) is the primary server, and the other is its backup. Once Avance is installed, all
operationandmanagementoftheserverpair isseentotheoperationsstaffandtheusersasthat
ofasingleserver.
VM1 VM2 VM3 VM4
Linux Windows Linux Linux
availability faultmanagement Avance
virtualization hypervisor software
serverA serverB
primary private backup
Ethernet
link
disks synchronousreplication disks
commonIPaddress
public
network
AvanceServer
The Ethernet connection is used for two purposes. One is to exchange health information
between the two servers. The other is to synchronously replicate changes being made to the
primaryserver’s disks to the backup server’s disks. The separation between the two servers can
beupto0.5kilometers.
Upto five public networkscanbe connected tothe Avanceserver.A public network is connected
via appropriate network devices to both servers. Both servers share the same IP address for a
publicnetwork.However,apublicnetworkisdrivenonlybytheprimaryserver.
Software
Avance comprises an embedded Xen bare-metal hypervisor2 and an embedded fault-
management layer. It is installed directly on the two servers without any intervening operating
system.
The Xen hypervisor supports multiple-core processors. Xen has been hardened by Stratus and
hasbeenmodifiedtosupportAvance’sfault-managementservices.Inaddition,allcertifieddevice
drivershavebeenhardenedbyStratus.
2FaultToleranceforVirtualEnvironments–Parts1,2,and3,AvailabilityDigest;March,April,andJune,2008.
3
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Avance maintains synchronization between the primary and backup disks using synchronous
replication. Replication is at the cache block level. No change can be made to the source cache
untilthatsamechangehas beenreplicatedtothebackupcache.Inthis way, itis guaranteedthat
thetwodisksystemsarealwaysidentical.
VirtualMachines
Avance can support up to eight virtual machines (VMs). Each VM can support a different guest
operating system. Supported guest operating systems include Windows Server 2003, Red Hat
EnterpriseLinux,andCentOSopen-sourceLinux.
Fault Management
FaultMonitoring
Usingpredictivefaultdetection,Avancecontinuallymonitorsthehealthoftheprimaryandbackup
serversandtakesimmediateactionifitdetectsanyanomaly.Ifitdoesdetectafaultorapotential
fault in the primary server, it will initiate a failover to the backup server if the backup server is in
betterhealth.Itsgoalistokeepthelogicalserveraliveregardlessoffaultswithinit.
Avance monitors the health of the two servers via heartbeats sent over the private Ethernet link.
Faults are rated by severity and affect the health score for the server. Such faults might include
the failure of a disk unit, the failure of a fan, the failure of a power supply in a server with dual
powersupplies,orthefailureofalinktoapublicnetwork.
Backupserverfaultsthatleavethatserverstilloperationalaresimplyreported.Ifthefaultisinthe
primary server, and if the backup server is in better health, Avance will fail over to the backup
server,asdescribedlater.
AparticularlyonerousfaultisthefailureoftheprivateEthernetlink.Server-healthinformationcan
still beexchangedviaone of thepublic networks,butthebackupdisk cannotbesynchronized.In
this case, an attempt to fix the problem is to restart the backup server, as many faults are
transientsoftwarefaultsandcanbecorrectedbyrebooting.Arestartcantakeontheorderoffive
minutes,butitistransparenttotheuserssincetheotherserverisstillrunningtheapplications.
If the restart is successful, the backup database is resynchronized; and high availability is
restored.Iftherestartisunsuccessful,thebackupisdeclareddown.
A crash of the primaryserver is a catastrophic fault. In this case, all work in progress is lost; and
the backup server must take over. It takes twenty to thirty seconds for the backup server to take
over, at which point the VMs are rebooted. As soon as the VM reboot is complete, the system is
returned to normal operation. Except for the unlikely simultaneous failure of the two servers, this
is the worst case for recovery times. All other failovers impact the users for a minimal amount of
time, typically unnoticed by the user, with Linux performing better than Windows in the current
release.
FaultReporting
Stratus provides 24x7 monitoring of its systems in the field. This is accomplished via the Call
Homefeaturebuiltintoeverysystem.
Call Home uses one of the public networks to communicate warnings, faults, and recovery
actions initiated by the system. If the problem requires a parts replacement, Stratus will
immediately ship that part to the customer. In many cases, a replacement part arrives at the
customer’ssitebeforethecustomerisevenawareoftheproblem.
4
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

For critical software problems, Call Home will send logs, traces, and memory dumps. Stratus
personnel can access the system remotely to try to determine what is going wrong and to
proposeafix.
Somecompaniesarereluctanttogiveathirdpartydirectaccesstotheirsystems.Inthesecases,
thedebuggingdatacanbecopiedtoamemorystickandtransmittedtoStratusforanalysis.
Failover
There are several failover scenarios to describe. In all cases, failover to the backup server will
occur only if the backup server is in better health than the primaryserver. For instance, if a RAID
disk and one of the dual power supplies on the backup server is down, a fan failure on the
