VRRP – Virtual Router Redundancy Protocol
October2008
The quest for continuous availability is not localized to the computer room. Mission-critical
systems are unavailable if users do not have access to them. Therefore, the network
interconnecting the users to their servers as well as the communication links between dispersed
data-processingelementsmustbeequallyreliable.
Thismeans,ofcourse,thatallnetwork pathsmustberedundantsothatthereisabackuppathto
route around any component that should fail.1 Furthermore, failover to a backup path should be
very fast so that users are not inconvenienced. In large IP networks, high reliability is achieved
typically by dynamic routing.2 Using protocols such as RIP (Routing Information Protocol),
network routers continually keep their neighbors informed about their connectivity so that each
routercanmaintainamapofthenetwork.Thus,eveninthepresenceofnetworkreconfigurations
andfailures,trafficcanberoutedaroundproblemareastoreliablyreachitsdestination.
However, dynamic routing protocols arecomplex and impose asignificant burden on the network
routing components. In addition, it may take many minutes to discover a new network topology.
As a result, it is impractical to carry these techniques all the way back to clients and servers
(especiallyusers’laptopsanddesktops).Sohowatthefirst-hoplevel,wherepacketsaretryingto
maketheirwayfromuserstothelargernetwork,canredundancybeachieved?
This is theroleof theVirtualRouter RedundancyProtocol(VRRP).VRRPprovides virtualrouters
comprising multiple physical routers with a common IP address so that first-hop routing survives
inthepresenceofaphysical-routerfailure.Itdoessoinsecondsandwithcompletetransparency
to the users and servers that the virtual router is supporting. In addition, the physical routers
comprisingavirtual-routergroupcanload-sharethenetworktrafficroutedtothevirtualrouter.
What Does VRRP Do?
VRRP provides transparent recovery from a router failure at the first-hop level. It is therefore
designed,forinstance,tosupporttrafficbeingsentbetweenalocalLANandanexternalnetwork.
To understand the benefits that VRRP brings, let us look at how we might implement router
redundancywithoutVRRPbyusingredundantrouterswithoutvirtualization.
BackupviaRedundantRouters
To protect against a router failure, one solution is to provide a pair of routers, one acting as the
primary router and the other as a backup router. Each has its own IP address that may or may
1W.H.Highleyman,P.J.Holenstein,B.D.Holenstein,Chapter5,RedundantReliableNetworks,BreakingtheAvailability
BarrierII:AchievingCenturyUptimeswithActive/ActiveSystems,AuthorHouse;2007.
2W.R. Stevens,Chapter10,DynamicRoutingProtocols,TCP/IPIllustrated:Volume1–TheProtocols,Addison-Wesley;
1994.
1
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

not be known by the hosts supported by the routers (we use the term host to include user PCs
andworkstationsaswellastheserverswithwhichtheyarecommunicating).
For instance, let us designate the routers in a
primary/backup pair as Router R1 and Router R2. IP
Router R1 has an IP address of IP(R1), and Cloud
Router R2 has an IP address of IP(R2). Normally,
all hosts on the LAN are sending their traffic to IP
address IP(R1); and this traffic is forwarded by
Router R1. However, should Router R1 fail, the
hosts will switch their outgoing traffic to Router R2.
RouterR2nowforwardsthetrafficfromtheLAN. R1 R2
Conceptually, this is straightforward. However, the
IP(R1) IP(R2)
problem is how does a host know when a router
has failed; and how does it know what the IP LAN
address is to which it should switch? It can detect
a router failure when it fails to get a response to a
request. However, response timeout might have to
beaminuteorso;andhowisitknownthatthisisa
routerproblemandnotaremoteserverproblem?
Furthermore, once a host has decided that there is RedundantRouters
a router failure, how does it know to which IP
address to switch? Two solutions to this problem are for each host to already know the two IP
addresses of the primary/backup pair or for a network administrator to reconfigure the hosts to
usethebackupIPaddress.
The first solution requires that some network topology information be embedded in each host.
This is not a normal capability for thin clients. It will have to be added as a plug-in to each user’s
browser,whichwillbeamanagementnightmareinalargenetwork.
The second solution may result in switchover times that will be painfully long. First, the network
managermustrealizethatthereis a problem.Hemustthenanalyzethesituation anddecidethat
a failover is appropriate. Finally, he must issue a reconfiguration command to the routers. This
couldtakemanyminutes.
VRRP solves these problems. It automatically detects a primary router failure in just a few
seconds (typically three to four seconds) and automatically routes all traffic to the backup router.
ThisisalltransparenttotheclientsandserverswhichVRRPsupports.
BackupviaVirtualRouters
Using VRRP, the tasks of detecting a router failure and switching over to the backup router are
handled within the routers themselves. To clients and servers on the LAN, the primary/backup
router pair appears as a single router with a single IP address. The hosts on the LAN are
completelyunawarethattheyarenottalkingtoasinglerouter.
For instance, as in the previous example, primary Router R1 and backup router R2 will have
physical IP addresses IP(R1) and IP(R2), respectively. However, as a virtualized pair, a virtual
router V1 can be created with IP address IP(V1). When R1 is operational, all traffic routed to
IP(V1) will be forwarded by Router R1. Should Router R1 fail, all traffic routed to IP(V1) will
instead be forwarded by Router R2. The failover is fast and is transparent to the hosts on the
LAN.
2
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

The virtual IP address IP(V1) is the real physical
address of the router that is to be the primary IP
Cloud
router. In this example, IP(V1) will be equal to
IP(R1). Router R1 is known as the owner of the
virtualrouter.
In VRRP, the router which is currently active and
carrying the communication load is known as the R1 R2
master. Ownership leads to some special
characteristics in a virtual router. For one, it is the
IP(R1) IP(R2)
owner that always becomes the master router at
IP(V1)
startup.
master VirtualRouter(V1) backup
For another, if the owner fails and is returned to IP(V1)
service, master status is always returned to the
LAN
owner.
MultipleVirtualBackups
In a similar way, VRRP can support multiple
backups. Let us add another backup router to our
configuration –Router R3 with physical IP address VRRPRedundantRouters
IP(R3). In normal operation, traffic routed to the
virtualaddressIP(V1)willbeforwardedbymasterRouterR1.
Should it fail, one of the backup routers, backup Router R2 or backup Router R3, will take over
the master role. VRRP determines which backup router to promote to master based on a priority
assignment made to all routers, as described later. Should the new master router fail, the
remainingbackuprouterwillassumetheroleofmaster.
This VRRP configuration can be
IP
extended to any number of backup
Cloud
routers.3
Recovery from multiple failures is a
little more involved than in the case
of the dual-router configuration
describedaboveanddepends upon R1 R2 R3
ownership. The owner, if
operational, is always the master.
IP(R1) IP(R2) IP(R3)
Let us call the current master the IP(V1)
incumbent and the newly repaired
router the contestant. If the master VirtualRouter(V1) backup backup
incumbent is the owner, then any IP(V1)
new contestant becomes a backup.
LAN
If the contestant is the owner, then
it becomes master, preempting the
role of master from the current
incumbent.
However, if neither the incumbent
northecontestantistheowner(i.e., VRRPRouterwithMultipleBackups
the owner is still down), the new master is determined by priority and preemption mode. If the
virtual router is configured with preemption not allowed, the current incumbent remains the
3Upto254backuprouters,ormanymorethanwillprobablyeverbeused.
3
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

master. However, if the configuration allows preemption, the router with the highest priority
becomesthemaster.
RouterLoadSharing
The physical routers comprising a virtual router can
share the communication load addressed to the IP
virtualrouter. Todothis, multiple virtual networks are Cloud
configured with different virtual IP addresses but with
each using some or all of the physical routers in the
virtualroutergroup.
For instance, consider a two-router virtualized pair R1 R2
comprising Router R1 and Router R2. One virtual
router V1 is configured with IP address IP(V1) and
