Surviving DNS DDoS Attacks
November2013
DDoS attacks are on the rise. A DDoS attack launches a massive amount of traffic to a
websitetooverwhelm ittothepointthatitnolonger canfunction.Thewebsitedoes nothave
the resources or network bandwidth to respond to legitimate requests from its users. Results can include
lostrevenues,lostcustomers,andlostbrandreputation.
A particularly sensitive system in a company’s web infrastructure is its DNS server. The DNS server
responds to requests to convert URLs to IP addresses so that messages can be sent to target systems
overtheWeb.WithoutitsDNSserver,acompanycannotcommunicatewiththeoutsideworld.
Secure64’s DNS Authority1 (www.secure64.com) is a dedicated, authoritative DNS name server that is
designed to be self-protecting. It identifies and blocks attack traffic while continuing to respond to DNS
queriesfromlegitimatesources.
Bigger DDoS Attacks Are Coming More Frequently
Early on, most DDoS attacks generated about 10 gigabits-per-second (gbps) of malicious traffic.
However, the severityof DDoS attacks is increasing to the point where malicious traffic is now measured
in the hundreds of gigabits per second. The frequency of attacks is also increasing. The number of
attacksincreased53%from2011to2012.
TwonotableexamplesreportedintheDigestwereattacksagainstU.S.banksandSpamhaus:
 In September, 2012, in retaliation for the anti-Islamic YouTube video “Innocence of Muslims,
Islamic hackers launched massive DDoS attacks against several U.S. banks that took down their
online banking portals for over a day each. In December, they repeated their attacks; and they
havevowedtocontinue the attacks untilthe video is removedfrom theInternet.2Their attacks so
farhavegeneratedupto70gbpsofmalicioustraffic–enoughtooverwhelmmostwebsites.
 In March of 2013, Spamhaus was hit with the most massive DDoS attack yet reported – a
maliciousdatarateof300gbps! Spamhausisafirm thatmaintainsablacklistofspam-generating
sites and sells the list to corporations, government agencies, and ISPs so that they can block
traffic from these sites. One of the web sites on the blacklist is CyberBunker. It is CyberBunker
thatissuspectedoflaunchingtheattack.3
1SurvivingDNSDDoSAttacks,Secure64WhitePaper.Availableatwww.secure64.com.
2IslamicHacktivistsAttackU.S.Banks,AvailabilityDigest;October2012.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0710/bank_attacks.pdf
DDoSAttacksonU.S.BanksContinue,AvailabilityDigest;January2013.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0801/more_bank_attacks.pdf
3History’sLargestDDoSAttack?,AvailabilityDigest;April2013.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0804/spamhaus.pdf
1
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Current Defenses Against DDoS Attacks
To defend against DDoS attacks directed at their DNS servers, companies have invested in more
sophisticated firewalls and Intrusion Prevention Systems (IPS), and they have over-provisioned their
networks and DNS servers for sufficient capacity to ward off attacks. However, these solutions add cost,
complexity,andlatencytothenetwork.
Router ACLs (access control lists) can be used to block attack traffic once it has been identified, but they
do not detect DDoS attacks on their own. Traditional firewalls pass or block traffic from ranges of IP
addresses, but they are not designed to analyze the traffic that passes through them. This makes them
unable to defend against protocol exploits or UDP or TCP flood attacks. Though IPS appliances do a
good job of detecting invalid packets, they cannot detect attacks that employ valid packets like UDP and
TCPfloods.
DNS Attacks and Their Mitigation with Secure64 DNS Authority
The Secure64 DNS Authority server detects several types of DNS attacks and mitigates them to protect
the DNS server. Attacks can be categorized either as protocol exploit attacks or flood attacks. Flood
attacksincludeTCPSYNfloods,illegalDNSpacketfloods,UDPfloods,andTCPfloods.
ProtocolExploits
ProtocolexploitssendillegalIPorTCPtraffictoatargetDNSserverinanattempttocrippletheI/Odriver
thatishandlingthenetworktraffic.
TheseattacksareeasilymitigatedbyDNSAuthoritybysimplytestingtheI/Odriverforallcombinationsof
invalid traffic. Malformed packets or invalid combinations of header bits are dropped immediately. Packet
typesthatareprotectedincludeARPpackets,MACpackets,TCPpackets,andIPpackets.
TCPSYNFlood
A TCP SYN flood corrupts the three-way handshake used by TCP to
establish a connection. In this protocol, the connection initiator sends a
SYN request. The target system responds with a SYN-ACK indicating
that it is ready to establish a connection. The initiator sends an ACK to
completetheconnection.
During a TCP SYN flood, the attacker sends a SYN request to the
victim DNS server with a spoofed sending address. The victim system
responds with a SYN-ACK, but the attacker does not send the final
ACK. Nor does the spoofed sender, since it receives the SYN-ACK but
knows that it did not send the SYN. The victim machine allocates
resources to the pending connection and holds them for several
minutes before timing out. By sending a flood of SYN requests to the
victim,theattackercanquicklyconsumealloftheconnectionresourcesofthevictimsystem,preventingit
fromestablishinganynewconnectionswithexternalsystems.
TheSecure64DNS Authorityserver protects againstTCP SYN flood attacks bynotallocating connection
resources until the three-way handshake is complete. When a SYN is received, a small pre-connection
entry is made in a data structure and begins to age. If the final ACK is received before the timeout,
resources are allocated and the connection is completed. If the final ACK is not received, the pre-
connectionentryisdeleted.
2
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Thus,nocriticalresources areallocateduntiltheconnectionprotocolhas beencompleted,andTCPSYN
floodshavenoeffectonthesystem.Establishedconnectionscontinuetooperatenormally.
Inaddition,theDNSAuthorityserverlimitsthenumberofincomingSYNsto100,000persecond.
IllegalDNSPacketFloods
DNS reflection is a particularly vicious type of attack since it can generate massive amounts of malicious
data sent to the victim DNSserver with onlyarelativelysmallamount of efforton the part of the attacker.
DNS reflection was used in the recent attack on Spamhaus, referenced earlier, to generate a DDoS
attackof300gbps.
DNS reflection depends upon DNS open resolvers. An open resolver is a DNS server that will respond to
a request from any source. The attacker sends DNS requests to resolve an address to multiple open
resolvers with the spoofed source IP address of the victim DNS server. The open resolver DNS system
willreturnitsresponsetothevictim DNSserver,thuspotentiallyoverwhelmingit.Thereasonthatthisisa
particularly vicious attack is that the DNS response message is about 100 times as big (about 3,000
bytes) as the request message (about 30 bytes). Therefore, the attacker can generate a massive amount
ofmalicioustrafficbygeneratingonly1%ofthattraffic.
Years ago, DNS open resolvers were recognized as a security issue; and efforts were made to close all
DNSresolvers.Unfortunately,busynetwork administratorsarenotparticularlyincentivizedtoupdatetheir
DNS servers. There are still about 27 million open resolvers on the Internet, and their IP addresses are
known.
To mitigate DNS packet floods, the Secure64 DNS Authority server takes advantage of the fact that its
job is to respond to queries, not to get queryresponses.The I/O driver rejects any DNS queryresponses
received bythe DNS server’s configured DNS IP addresses and ports and allows onlyproperlyformatted
DNS queries to be delivered to the server. Thus, the massive attack by a flood of DNS responses never
reachestheDNSserver.
UDPDataFloods
Similar to the illegal DNS packet floods described above that overwhelm a DNS server with false DNS
query responses, UDP floods overwhelm a DNS server with false DNS queries. The attacker uses a
botnet(anetworkofcompromisedcomputers)tomakemorerequestsofaDNSserverthanitcanhandle.
This causes the DNS server to drop inbound UDP DNS requests. Thus, legitimate users cannot get
service reliably from their DNS server. The source addresses of the botnet are spoofed so that they
cannotbefiltered.
Protection against UDPfloods aremoredifficulttohandlethan the previouslydescribedattacks sincethe
DNS server is being bombarded with what appears to be legitimate traffic. The DNS Authority server
protects itself from these floods through automatic IP-based rate limiting and configurable aggregate rate
limiting:
 TheaggregatenumberofUDPpacketspersecondcanbelimited.
 ThenumberofUDPpacketspersecondcanbelimitedfromeachsourceIPaddress.
 If the packet rate from a given source exceeds the designated limit, the IP address is blacklisted
andallofitsincomingpacketsaredropped.
 Ifthefloodfrom ablacklistedIPaddressdropsoff,theIPaddressisremovedfromtheblacklistto
ensurethataspoofedaddressdoesnotblockarealuser.
 Repeatoffensesresultinfasterblacklistingthantheinitialoffense.
3
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

If the aggregate packet rate should be exceeded, DNS Authority will begin to drop packets on a
probabilistic basis to maintain the incoming packet rate at the configured limit. This mayresult in the loss
ofsomegoodtraffic,buttheservercanremainavailabletomuchofthegoodtrafficandtoadministrators.
TCPDataFloods
Similar to the UDP floods described above, TCP floods cause the DNS server to refuse to establish new
connections. Thus, legitimate users cannot get service reliably from their DNS server. The source
addressesofthebotnetarespoofedsothattheycannotbefiltered.
For TCP traffic, DNS Authority tracks resource usage (specifically, network buffers) to detect and block
specific overload situations. Data sources that are consuming more than their fair share of system
resourcesaredetectedandblocked.TCPtrafficrulesincludethefollowing:
 Theaggregatenumberofpacketsinthenetworkbufferscanbelimited.
 ThenumberofTCPpacketspersecondcanbelimitedfromeachsourceIPaddress.
 AdministratorscanspecifythattrustedTCPtrafficisnotsubjecttomitigation.
 If the packet rate from a given source exceeds the designated limit, DNS Authority issues a TCP
Reset(RST)packettoblocktheattacker.
If the aggregate packet rate should be exceeded, DNS Authority will begin to drop packets on a
probabilistic basis in a manner that maintains the distribution of network-buffer resources. As with UDP
flood control, this mayresult in the loss of somegood traffic,but the server can remain available to much
ofthegoodtrafficandtoadministrators.
Test Results
The Secure64 DNS Authority server was tested by ExtremeLabs, an independent test laboratory. The
testsandtheirresultsincludedthefollowing:
ProtocolExploits
The DNS Authorityserver was placed under a nominal load of legitimate traffic,and then subjected to an
ARP flood in which the DNS server was flooded with inaccurate ARP protocol-based information at an
increasingrate.
TheDNSAuthorityserverremained100% responsivetolegitimatequeries whilemitigatingtheARPflood
attackuntilthetotaldataratesaturatedtheGigabitconnectionat830Mbpsoftraffic.
TCPSYNFloods
The DNS Authority server was placed under a legitimate traffic load while TCP SYNs were generated
fromanumberofsourcesystemsatanincreasingrate.
TheDNSAuthorityserverremained100% responsivetolegitimatequeries whilemitigatingtheSYNflood
attackuntilthetotaldataratesaturatedtheGigabitconnectionat830Mbpsoftraffic.
IllegalDNSPacketFloods
TheDNSAuthorityserver wasplacedunderamaximum loadof102,000legitimatequeriesper second.It
was then subjected to a DNS reflection attack of approximately 150,000 packets per second (about 82
Mbpsofattacktraffic).
The Secure64 DNS Authority server was able to answer 100% of the 102,000 legitimate queries per
secondwhiledroppingthereflectedDNSreflectionattack.
4
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

UDPandTCPDataFloods
To test DNS Authority’s response to UDP floods, a botnet directed a high volume of legitimate DNS
queries at the victim DNS server. The DNS Authority server blocked this traffic and maintained 100%
availability.
Secure64publishednotestresultsforTCPfloods.
Summary
Secure64 DNS Authority is a self-protecting DNS server that detects and blocks a wide variety of DDoS
attackswithlittleifanydegradationofservice.DNSAuthoritycanreducetheneedtooverprovisionserver
resourcesandeliminatestheneedtoprotectserverswithnetworksecuritydevices.
DNS Authority does not use BIND, the open-source freeware that is often used for DNS security. The
problem with BIND is that a new vulnerabilityis found everyfew weeks requiring patching. Secure64 built
itsownoperatingsystemanddoesnotuseBIND.
The DNS Authority server uses multiple defenses to mitigate DDoS attacks. These attacks include
protocol exploits, TCP SYN floods, reflected DNS attacks, and UDP and TCP data floods. Testing by an
independent testing lab showed that DNS Authority survived without incident all but the UDP and TCP
floods. In these cases, DNS Authority continued to service most legitimate requests; though some
requestsweredroppedandhadtoberepeated.
FundedinpartbytheDepartmentofHomelandSecurity, Secure64’s productsaresoldworldwidebyboth
Secure64andHP.Accordingto Secure64, itnever has hadacustomer experienceanydowntimedueto
aDDoSattack.
5
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com