have such an impact? Why was it so difficult to recover? Was data corrupted?
https://t.co/xISWWlkxOw
Few firms will be ready for new European breach disclosure rules, fines
The new European General Data Protection Regulation goes into effect next May with onerous notification
requirements and high penalties, but a year might not be enough for firms to get ready. Recent surveys
show that most companies are not prepared for the regulations. According to a recent survey, 80 percent
see GDPR as a priority, but only 25 percent have an established plan. Gartner estimates that the majority
of all companies affected by GDPR will still not be in compliance at the end of 2018.
https://t.co/XYKC2EI6v3
US utility offers clients cheap Tesla batteries for grid backup
For the first time, a power utility has teamed up with Tesla to use its battery packs for extra grid
power during peak usage times. Vermont's Green Mountain Power (GMP) is not only installing
Tesla's industrial Powerpacks on utility land, it's also subsidizing home Powerwall 2s for up to 2,000
customers. Rather than firing up polluting diesel generators, the utility can use them to provide
electricity around the state. At night, when power usage is low, they're charged back up again.
https://t.co/NxcIBpTWrp
British Airways: Flights cancelled amid IT crash
Serious problems with British Airways' IT systems led to thousands of passengers having their plans
disrupted. All flights from Heathrow and Gatwick were cancelled.
https://t.co/eKUOfeSGAD
6
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

How many Teslas does it take to black out an apartment block?
While Australia’s slow uptake of electric vehicles is a source of great frustration to some, to others,
like the nation’s owners and builders of apartment blocks, it offers precious time to work through
some of the more thorny problems that are expected to arise out of mass EV uptake. Problems such
as: Who pays for the electricity used to charge an EV in an apartment building carpark? How do you
bill it? How much will it cost apartment dwellers to charge their EVs at home? Where should EV
charging stations be put? What does it do to a building’s emissions profile? And how many Tesla
Model S cars can be charged at one apartment block before its lifts cut out?
https://t.co/f5VCc3tUeU
The Last Itanium, At Long Last
In a world of survival of the fittest coupled with mutations, something always has to be the last of its
kind. And so it is with the “Kittson” Itanium 9700 processors, which Intel quietly released in May and
which will mostly see action in the last of the Integrity line of midrange and high-end systems from
Hewlett Packard Enterprise.
https://t.co/U5LIDH3S3y
Starbucks Turns Coffee Beans into Coffee and Lemons into Lemonade
In late Spring, Starbucks experienced a technology glitch that shut down its payment system in
various stores throughout the U.S. and Canada. A failure like this could have cost the coffee shops
millions of dollars. Think about it. If you owned a store and couldn’t accept payment for whatever you
sold, what would you do? Starbucks stated that its stores would stay open. Most locations did – and
took care of their customers. That means they still gave the customers their drinks but didn’t take
their money.
https://t.co/jyYj8Cm121
Processing system glitch hits airports across Australia
Travellers trying to check in for international flights out of Australia in late May suffered long delays
when the immigration department’s passenger processing system crashed. Based on technology
from air transport industry IT provider Sita, the system – known as Advanced Passenger Processing
(APP) – is used by airlines to verify travelers’ passports and to ensure they are cleared to fly.
Carriers were forced to resort to manual check-ins for passengers, and long queues formed at
counters across Australian international departure terminals.
https://t.co/5rbsgcKe2J
What the Northwest Could Learn from Japan’s Eco-Friendly ‘Smart Homes’
Recovering from a big earthquake and tsunami has lead Japan to invest in new communities called
“smart cities” with interconnected electric cars, solar panels and advanced energy-saving
technology. They’re eco-friendly, and they’re also better prepared for when the next big one hits
because they’re filled with “smart homes” that supply their own power when disaster strikes.
There’s nothing quite like these “smart homes” in the U.S. Pacific Northwest…yet.
https://t.co/5r0NlxSeuo
7
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Hackers hit Russian bank customers, planned international cyber raids
Russian cyber criminals used malware planted on Android mobile devices to steal from domestic
bank customers and were planning to target European lenders before their arrest. Their campaign
raised a relatively small sum by cyber-crime standards - more than 50 million rubles ($892,000).
https://t.co/Iarg6d7Gaw
Honeywell Gets First Airline for Data-Driven MRO Service
HNA Group subsidiary Hainan Airlines will become the first airline to use Honeywell's GoDirect
Maintenance Service program, which Honeywell has designed to use connectivity and data analytics
to improve maintenance operations and reduce equipment downtime.
https://t.co/g2FQSK2Q8u
Now available on-demand: The Disrupted Data Center - cloud-based resiliency
spreads workloads across data centers
Uptime Institute’s recent webinar discusses:
• A deep dive into the pros and cons of four resilient architectures (traditional single-site,
linked-site, distributed-site, cloud-based)
• Challenges with distributed resiliency
• Multi-site infrastructure best practices and the benefits of Uptime Institute Tier Certification
• Common causes of failure in data centers and outage costs
okt.to/U9xfmD
Arctic stronghold of world’s seeds flooded after permafrost melts
It was designed as an impregnable deep-freeze to protect the world’s most precious seeds from any
global disaster and ensure humanity’s food supply forever. But the Global Seed Vault, buried in a
mountain deep inside the Arctic circle, has been breached after global warming produced
extraordinary temperatures over the winter, sending meltwater gushing into the entrance tunnel.
https://t.co/lNVoDnMT7x
Is Serviceability More Critical to IIoT Than Security or Availability?
Whenever talk turns to the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT), security and availability typically take
center stage. It’s easy to see why the security topic arises since in any IIoT structure, a large degree
of device and system openness is required that runs counter to the historical design of such
systems. Availability also looms large in IIoT discussions because immediate access to computing is
so critical. Some in IT argue that although these factors are important, they should be positioned
further down the IIoT adoption curve.
https://t.co/MaXKcA9LcX
The Big Green Bang: how renewable energy became unstoppable
It is early, but the evidence is mounting. Wind and solar parks are being built at unprecedented
rates, threatening the business models of established power companies. Electric cars that were hard
to even buy eight years ago are selling at an exponential rate, in the process driving down the price
of batteries that hold the key to unleashing new levels of green growth.
https://t.co/vlcTg8oUej
8
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

7 Painful Outages for Big Brands in Q1 2017
The start of 2017 saw some of the biggest brands scurrying to fix unexpected and damaging website
outages. Check out the 7 most talked-about system downtime incidents of Q1 2017. One of the
hottest topics surrounding the outages this quarter is not how the problem happened but how the
company handled it. And when companies showed true transparency in the process, as GitLab and
Instapaper did, they were heaped with praise instead of criticism. These cases prove that a disaster
can be turned around into an opportunity to strengthen — rather than harm — one’s reputation.
https://t.co/ku7c6EKEzv
What SaaS DevOps teams are saying about SLA, availability and performance
Not having an SLA or status page for availability costs companies in lost revenue, compensation and
brand reputation. To find out how SaaS organisations meet their SLAs (service level agreements)
with customers and the challenges they face, the Imperva Incapsula team surveyed nearly 400
industry DevOps professionals responsible for IT, product development, network ops, engineering
and e-commerce.
https://t.co/k8yNKO23B4
Toronto's glass condos are burning thermal holes in the sky
The Toronto-led TransformTO road map calls for all new buildings to put out near net-zero
emissions by 2030. But in a city where half the greenhouse gas emissions now come from leaky
buildings, the glass condo boom may be setting the city up for failure.
https://t.co/Y47wZXybgx
Weathering the Storm: How Storm Impact Analytics Can Save Utilities
Now seen as the “new norm,” major outages from U.S. coast to coast due to severe weather have
increased six-fold in the past 20 years More than ever before, utilities are under rapidly increasing
pressure to address the threats that severe and volatile weather pose to their operations. Knowing
how to execute the proper response is becoming an increasingly coveted skill, and using innovative
technology through storm impact analytics will prove key to responding to a crisis that affects a
utility’s functionality.
https://t.co/6cXYkhjGlE
Will America’s Steel City Build the First Grid of Microgrids?
To many, the idea of creating a grid of microgrids is somewhere out in the future. Even a pipe
dream. But for Pittsburgh, it’s now. The city is pursuing an aggressive plan to lead on energy, which
includes developing a series of connected local energy systems. “The idea of having an energy plant
that is 100 miles away producing energy to make your toast would be left in the 19th century, where it
was started,” said Pittsburgh Mayor William Peduto.
https://t.co/ai4ncaltU1
9
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Power Outage in Large Part of Iceland
A power outage affected an area from Kirkjubæjarklaustur in South Iceland and eastwards to
Vopnafjörður in Northeast Iceland for about two hours in May. The root of the problem was traced to
a leakage in an aluminum smelting pot at the Grundartangi aluminum plant of Norðurál in West
Iceland.
https://t.co/mFMgX16jDT
Digest Mng Ed. Bill Highleyman presented “How ‘Fat’ Are Your Fingers?” at NYTUG - 25
May, Berkeley Heights, NJ (USA).
Improving Availability and Performance in Mainframe Storage Distance Replication
Networks
As a mainframe end user, the chances are quite likely that you have a disaster recovery/business
continuity strategy that requires you to replicate data to a remote site. That data may be stored on a
variety of media: spinning disk, flash/SSD, virtual tape, or physical tape cartridges. While some of
you may still be using the PTAM (pickup truck access method) and have tape cartridges physically
transported to an offsite location, the overwhelming majority of you are doing some form of electronic
data replication. For longer distances the replication methodology is usually asynchronous, while for
shorter distances (less than 50 miles) the replication methodology is often synchronous. The
platform/protocols used for the data replication over distance can be a wide variety including DWDM,
FCIP, or IP.
https://t.co/F4QDEWPMt5
Intel's Itanium, once destined to replace x86 processors in PCs, hits end of line
It’s the end of the line for Intel’s Itanium chip, a troubled processor family that spawned many
product delays and bad blood between HP and Oracle. In May, Intel started shipping in volume its
latest Itanium 9700 chip, code-named Kittson. It’s the last of the Itanium chips, which first appeared
in early 2001. Beyond Kittson, there will be no more chips coming from the Itanium family. That ends
a tumultuous, 16-year journey for Itanium, which Intel once envisioned as a replacement for x86
chips in 64-bit PCs and servers.
https://t.co/x7S6UMFhqC
Economic and regulatory issues do little to stop UK businesses wasting millions on
unnecessary downtime
UK businesses are hemorrhaging hundreds of millions of pounds a year via unplanned downtime by
not ensuring 24.7.365 access to data and applications. Despite awareness of the need to improve
their data management and storage processes, and with European regulations like the General Data
Protection Regulation (GDPR) requiring stricter enforcement of how data is handled, new research
finds organizations are still cannot ensure data availability, protection and recovery.
https://t.co/x4Ed8iTi7u
10
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

What to do if Amazon is down, because your S3 apps don't have to be
The Amazon Simple Storage Service outage in February was spectacular in both its scope and its
magnitude. It seemed as though it affected every Internet user on the planet, and it stirred up a
firestorm of bad press for the company. But let's face it, cloud outages will happen, which is why it's
imperative that software architects know what to do if Amazon is down.
https://t.co/nc3bwogFIv
From Good to Great: The Path to Improved System and Application Uptime
We can thank SaaS providers for raising the bar with regard to system and application availability.
Today, while 99.5 percent system and application uptime are considered “standard” by most cloud
providers; this equates to 3.42 hours of downtime per month—a significant speed bump in today’s
always-on business environment. Increasingly this “min” bar is being raised to 99.99 percent–a
figure which equates to 38 minutes (or less) of downtime per month. The question many IT
organizations face: How to meet this uptime imperative without significantly increasing costs?
Ensuring the right disciplines are in place is a good place to start.
https://t.co/avnM8rUzVx
Enterprise-owned data centres still ‘essential’ despite cloud growth, research notes
Enterprises may be starting to move workloads to the cloud, but enterprise-owned data centres
remain the ‘primary compute venue’ with workloads staying consistent over the past three years,
according to new research from the Uptime Institute.
https://t.co/Igas09eJqw
11
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

