HP’s Cloud Recovery-as-a-Service (RaaS)
June2012
The protection of mission-critical services from outages has become a critical priority for many
enterprises. Financial service organizations, mobile communication carriers, health care providers, and
web hosting services are only the tip of the iceberg. Almost all companies have applications that will
wreak havoc withtheiroperationsshouldtheygodown,oftencostingthem thousandsofdollarsaminute,
nottomentionerosionofcustomerloyaltyandotherpenalties.
Thoughthecost of downtimeis aserious consideration, evenmoreimportant is the loss of datafollowing
anoutage. Acompanycan usuallysurvivedowntimetosomeextent,butitmaynotbeabletosurvivethe
lossofitscorporatedata.
Classic tape-recovery strategies today are woefully inadequate for these critical applications. They often
providerecoverytimesmeasuredindays,withpotentialdatalossalsomeasuredindaysbecausealldata
sincethelastbackupis lost.Thealternative– datareplicationto a hotstandbysiteinaremotelocation –
canproviderecoverytimesmeasuredinhoursanddatalossmeasuredinminutes.However,thissolution
isoftenprohibitivelyexpensive.
A common alternative is to turn to a collocation recovery service provider that will provide systems to
carry a failed production load following an outage. However, it requires some time to configure the
required systems at the time of an outage, the organization loses control of its disaster recovery site, the
hardware and software configuration must be kept up-to-date – an error-prone process, testing is difficult
andrisky,andongoingcostsarestillhigh.
Whatis neededis a flexible,easytoschedulecontinuitysolutionthathas predictablecost withno upfront
large capital expense. The new cloud-based Recovery-as-a-Service solutions provide these advantages.
A synchronized copy of all application and system data is maintained in the recovery cloud via data
replication. Virtual machines (VMs) stand ready to be deployed to take over production processing upon
the failure of the production environment. The service cost is minimal during normal production when
continuity services are not needed. However, the cloud can spring into action rapidly should the
productionsitegodownandcarryonproductionprocessingwithminimaldowntimeanddataloss.
Moreover, one of the predominant causes of failover faults is corrected. Companies often find that when
faced with an outage, the failover to the backup site fails because its hardware or software versions have
not been kept up to date. With cloud continuity services, hardware configuration changes simply mean a
change in the virtual machine and storage allocation for the applications. Software upgrades are
automaticallytakencareofbydatareplication.
Because of the risk of failover faults, many companies are reluctant to test failover. Should an outage
happen,theirstrategyisbasedonfaithandhope.Withcloudcontinuityservices,failoverisautomaticand
relatively risk free. A failover test can be scheduled on short notice, or a clone of the production
1
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

environment can be brought up in the cloud to test the backup environment. Should an actual outage
occur,thesuccessofthefailovercanbeassured.
HP’sCloud-BasedContinuityServices
HP has recently announced its cloud-based continuity services, HP Enterprise Cloud Services –
Continuity.1 These services extend its classic continuity services that it has been providing to its
customers for more than two decades via its disaster recoverycenters. HP’s Enterprise Cloud Services –
Continuity provides cloud-basedRecovery-as-aService(RaaS) toenterprises.For acostestimatedtobe
20% to 50% of that needed to repurpose a development and test system for disaster recovery, HP’s
RaaS meets Recovery Time Objectives (RTOs) of one to four hours and Recovery Point Objectives
(RPOs) of no more than fifteen minutes of lost data. There are no upfront capital expenses. HP’s RaaS
cloudservicesareacost-effectivealternativetotraditionalservice-providerorin-housemodels.
HP’s cloud continuity services are designed to protect applications running under Windows or Linux.
Application may be running in a virtual environment under VMware. For continuity protection for other
environments,HPprovidesitsManagedResiliencyServices.
The HP RaaS cloud is very flexible. It only takes a few days to initially provision and deploy the backup
environment. Changes can be set up in a day. Recovery testing can be scheduled on just two days’
notice. The backup environment is a clone of the production environment and can be used for other
purposes such as application testing, user acceptance testing, and quality assurance, without affecting
productionprocessing.
In the event of a business interruption, the production environment is rapidly recreated from cloud-
allocated virtual servers. All necessary context and state information for these servers has been
replicatedandisimmediatelyavailabletotheappropriateservers.Applicationsarerestartedintheproper
order,networks arereroutedtothecloud,andnormalproductionprocessingresumes.Onlythatdatathat
wasintransitinthereplicationpipelineislost.
Equallyimportant,fallbackiseasyandrisk-free.
NormalOperations
During normal operations, Windows and
ProductionDataCenter CloudRaaSCenter
Linux servers in the production data
productionservers
center provide application processing for
VM
the enterprise. Applications may be VM unallocated
VM
running in virtual machines or on their VM physical servers
VM server
own dedicated servers. The storage VM
systems may be local to the servers or
maybestoragearraynetworks.
prod. PS replication Target cloud
Theonlymodificationto this configuration storage Server Server storage
is the replication network that keeps the
cloud RaaS storage synchronized with
the application data and system software
network
changes being made by the production NormalOperations
systems. HP-provided replication
software runs on every protected
production machine in the data center.
Since replication is asynchronous, no
users
transaction is held up; and the replication
1GeorgeFerguson,Cloud-basedbusinesscontinuity,HPWhitePaper;May2012.
2
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

softwareimposesonlyasmallload,intheorderof2-3%,ontheproductionservers.
One or more dedicatedWindows or Linux Process Servers (PS Servers) are provided at the data center.
They receive all changes to the application data and system files that are being replicated. The PS
servers are the replication engines. The replication network may be a VPN over the Internet or private
dedicated communication links.The PS Servers provide the compute-intensive functions of compression,
encryption,WANacceleration,andbandwidthmanagementforthereplicationnetwork.
ThePSServers replicatethedatathattheyarereceivingtooneor moretargetservers intheRaaScloud
that are dedicated to the production data center. These servers decrypt and decompress the data and
store it on HP 3PAR storage arrays in the cloud data center. The 3PAR storage arrays provide high
performance,highavailability,andstrongsecurity.
Therefore,duringnormaloperations,theonlyadditionalfunctionwhenusingtheHPRaaSservicesisthat
all application data and system software changes are being replicated to the cloud. Resident in the cloud
is a synchronized copy of all production application data (within the replication latency) and current
images of the operating systems for each server and virtual machine in the production center. The RaaS
cloud is ready to continue the processing functions of the production data center should the data center
experienceanoutage.
Failover
Then the unthinkable happens!
Application processing for part or all of
thedatacenter is halted bysomeserious
event. System operators and
management scurry to determine the
cause and the impact of the outage.
Decisions are made whether to try to
recover the systems in the data center or
to fail over one or more of the production
systemstotheRaaScloud.
The decision to failover is not a simple
decision, as it might be faster to attempt
a local recovery. For this reason, the
initiationofthefailoversequenceisnever
made automatically. However, once the
decision is made, it is simply a matter of
calling the cloud operators and
instructing them on the extent of the failover to be executed. Failover is quickly initiated via a control
consoleandproceedscompletelyautomaticallyfromthatpoint.
The required virtual servers are allocated from the virtual server pool in the cloud, and their operating
system images are built from the replicated data. The pertinent application data is attached to each
server, and the servers are booted in the order required by the application. The VMs in the recovery
centermatchtheserversintheproductioncenter.Theusernetwork isredirectedtotheRaaScenter,and
production operations are restored. The allocated servers are dedicated to the company as long as they
areneeded.
A company can elect to have its servers in the RaaS cloud be leveraged from the server pool.
Alternatively, if there is a concern about the available capacity in the cloud in the event of a wide-spread
event taking out several data centers, the company can elect to reserve servers for their exclusive use.
Reservedservers commandahigher price. For leveragedservers,HP follows stringentrisk-management
3
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

controls and has supported its customers’ leveraged requirements successfully for over 25 years of
classicrecoveryservices.
Fallback
When the outage at the production center has been corrected, it is time give the data center control over
productionprocessingonceagain.Thisprocessiscalledfallback.
Fallbackoccursintwophases–replicationandrecovery.
Replication
ProductionDataCenter CloudRaaSCenter
The first step is to resynchronize the
productionservers productionservers
production system’s application data and
VV MM VV MM
system software with the current state that
is represented by the RaaS cloud storage. VV MM physical VV MM physical
VV MM server VV MM server
To do this, the replication channel is
reversed, and the production system’s
databases are brought up to date. During
this phase, applications continue to run in prod. PS replication Target cloud
storage Server Server storage
therecoverycenter.
Recovery
redirectednetwork
Oncetheproductiondatabases andsystem
software have been brought up-to-date,
Failover
production can fall back to the production
data center. However, there is no need to
users
hurry this. Fallback can be scheduled for a
convenient time for the company. During this wait, production continues at the recovery center, and the
productiondatabasesandsystemsoftwarearekeptcurrentviathereplicationchannel.
When it is time to fallback, production processing is paused for the few minutes that it takes to complete
anytransactions in process and to drain the latest changes from thereplication channel to theproduction
storage devices. The user network is redirected back to the production data center, and processing can
then resume at the production data center with no lost data and no lost transactions. Replication to the
cloudrecoverycenterisrestartedtokeepitproperlysynchronized.
Security
Security is always a concern when a company allows its data to be stored in a cloud. One common
concern is where the data will be located. HP recognizes that companies and governments are often
restricted as to the location of their data by confidential and regulatory restrictions. HP is building RaaS
cloud centers around the world to accommodate these concerns. Recovery cloud centers currently exist
or are planned for the United States, the European Union, Australia, and Japan. Other countries will be
addedovertime.
The full range of physical and logical security is provided at all recovery centers. Physical access is
controlled by key card or biometric access, with video surveillance and 24x7 onsite security personnel.
Networks are protected by firewalls, intrusion detection, VPN monitoring, and VLAN separation. All data
transfers are encrypted in flight, and data can be encrypted in place if desired. Leveraged storage is
triple-scrubbed before reallocating it. Access to user accounts is based on the customer’s standard
authenticationprocedures.
4
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

All security events are logged by HP’s ArcSight Security Information and Event Management (SIEM)
facility and analyzed to provide Security Incident Responses through HP Global Security Operations
Centers.
HP Continuity Services
Toaidcustomers inachievingassuredcontinuityof their IT services,HP offersmanyconsultingservices,
including
 BusinessContinuityConsulting
 HighAvailabilityConsulting
 WorkplaceContinuityServices
 DataCenterContinuityServices
Summary
Cloud-based recovery services are available today to provide hot standby, data replication RPOs and
RTOsattapebackupprices.HP’sEnterpriseCloudServices–Continuityisanexcellentexampleofsuch
aservice.Withnoupfrontcapitalexpensesandlittleeffort,thisservicecanreliablyprovideRTOsofjusta
fewhourswithonlyminutesoflostdatafollowingaprimaryproductiondatacenteroutage.
5
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com