2015 Verizon Data Breach Investigations Report
August2015
Everyyearforthelastseveralyears,Verizonhasundertaken
anextensivesurveyondatabreachesandthenpublishedits
findingsinadetailedDataBreachInvestigationsReport(DBIR).We
summarizetheirfindingsfortheYear2014inthisarticle.Thefullreportcanbe
foundathttp://www.verizonenterprise.com/DBIR/2015/.
The2015reportincludes inputfrom 70contributingorganizations from around
the world. Verizon distinguishes between security incidents and data
breaches. A security incident is any event that compromises the
confidentiality,integrity,oravailabilityofaninformationasset.Adatabreachis
an incident that results in confirmed disclosure (not just exposure) of data to
an unauthorized party. The 2015 report is based on 79,790 security incidents
and2,122confirmeddatabreaches.
Thedataisbrokendowninto20differentindustrycategories.Thetopthreeindustriesaffectedbysecurity
incidentsarepublicservices,information,andfinancialservices.
Threat Actors
A threat actor is the entity that is engaging in an attack. About 85% of all threat actors were external.
They include criminal organizations and state-sponsored attackers. About 15% were internal employees.
Averysmallpercentagewerepartners.
Verizon defines a “secondary” motive. With such a motive, a victim was targeted as a means to advance
adifferentattack against another victim.One exampleis the hackingof a website toserve up malwareto
visitors in the hope that the true target of the actor will become infected. 70% of the attacks in 2014 were
secondaryattacks.Amajorityofthemweredenial-of-serviceattacks.
The major threat action was stolen credentials. This was followed by RAM scraping and phishing. The
incidenceofspywareandkeyloggingwasdownsignificantlyfromprioryears.
In 60% of the cases, attackers were able to compromise an organization in minutes. It took weeks or
monthsforover75%ofthevictimstodiscovertheattacks.
Report Organization
Thereportisorganizedintoeightmajorareas:
 Indicatorsofcompromise
 Phishing
1
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

 Vulnerabilities
 Mobile
 Malware
 Industryprofiles
 Impact
 InternetofThings
Thereportendswithaclassificationofincidencepatterns.
Indicators of Compromise
There has been a great deal of work on attempting to find indicators that a compromise may occur. To
date,thisefforthashadlittlesuccess.
One attempt was to combine six months of daily updates from 54 different sources of IP addresses and
domain names tagged as malicious by their feed aggregators. This included both inbound feeds (those
feeds from which malicious code might be received) and outbound feeds (those feeds to which stolen
datamightbesent).
Theresultwas thatif threat intelligenceindicators werereallyabletohelpanenterprisedefensestrategy,
one would need to have access to all of the feeds from all of the providers, a Herculean task. There is a
needforcompaniestobeabletoapplytheirthreatintelligencetotheirenvironmentsinsmarterways.
One possibility is for companies to share their threat information with each other. However, this would
have to be veryfast and veryefficient.Well over 90% of threats are active for only a day. 75% of attacks
spread from one victim to another in less than a day – 40% in less than an hour. Clearly, the speed of
sharingiskey.
Phishing
Phishing uses social engineering to gain a foothold in someone’s computer and then on to his network.
Typically,anemailis senttoanunsuspectinguser withalink toawebsitethatseemsinnocuous butthat
is,infact,malicious.Byinteracting withthesite,theusercangiveuphiscredentialssuchasuser names,
passwords,bankaccountnumbers,andcredit/debitcardinformation.
23% of email recipients open phishing emails, and 11% click on the attachments. Of these, 50% open
phishing emails and click on links within the first hour. Phishing was associated with 95% of incidents
attributed to state-sponsored attacks. It was associated with two-thirds of cyber-espionage incidents.
Statistics show that a campaign of just 10 emails yields a 90% chance that at least one person will
becomethecriminal’sprey.
Departments such as Communications, Legal, and Customer Service were far more likely to open an
emailthanallotherdepartments.
Data from the Anti-Phishing Working Group suggests that the phishing infrastructure is quite extensive.
Over9,000domainsandnearly50,000phishingURLsaretrackedeachmonth.
One of the most effective ways to minimize the phishing threat is through employee awareness. Some
companies purposefully send phishing email to their people. When the email is opened opened, the
employeewillreadthathehasjustopenedaphishingemail.
Vulnerabilities
A study of 200 million successful exploitations across 500 Common Vulnerability and Exposures (CVE)
reports from over 20,000 enterprises in 150 countries was used to create an aggregated picture of
2
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

exploited vulnerabilities over time. 99.9% of the exploited vulnerabilities were compromised more than a
year after the CVE was published. For the overwhelming majority of attacks exploiting known
vulnerabilities, the patch had been available for months prior to the breach. Just because a CVE gets old
doesn’tmeanitgoesoutofstyle.
In2014,tenCVEsaccountedforalmost97%oftheexploitsobserved.However,thereweresevenmillion
other exploited vulnerabilities. Half of the CVEs were exploited within the first two weeks of their
publication.
If a vulnerabilitygets a “cool” name such as Heartbleed, Poodle, or Sandworm, it probablyfalls within the
definition of a critical vulnerability. The bottom line is that all security patches should be applied, some
perhapsmorequicklythanthenormalpatchcycle.
Mobile
Mobile devices are not a preferred vector in data breaches. That being said, almost all malware attacked
Androiddevices.iOSdeviceswerefairlyimmune.Thebulk oftheAndroidmalwarecanbecategorizedas
adnoyance-ware, the receipt of unwanted ads. Over five billion downloaded Android apps are vulnerable
toremoteattacks.
Out of tens of millions of mobile devices, only 0.03% were infected with truly malicious exploits. 95% of
thesemalwaretypesshowedupforlessthanamonth.80%lastedforlessthanaweek.
Malware
The malware infections of nearly 10,000 organizations were studied in the 2015 DBIR. About five
malwareeventsoccureverysecond.Amongthetopfiveindustriessufferingmalwareinfectionswere:
 Education–2,332events/week
 Retail–801events/week
 Utilities–772events/week
 Insurance–575events/week
 FinancialServices–350events/week
Halfofallorganizationsdiscoveredmalwareeventsduring35orfewerdaysin2014.
Malware is getting more varied. In 2005, seven families of malware represented 70% of all malcode
activity. This malware focused on email worms. In 2014, 20 malware families represented 70% of all
malcodeandfocusedonbotnets,credentialtheft,andfraud.
70% to 90% of malware samples are unique to an organization. This simply means that the signatures
(specific code sequences) of a given piece of malware are changed from system to system to avoid
detectionbyanti-virusutilities.
Financial services organizations fix most infections within one day. Insurance organizations fix about half
inthreedays,andretailorganizationsfixhalfinaboutsevendays.Utilitiesfixhalfofinfectionsinabout10
days. It takes educational organizations about 50 days to fix half of all infections. This is probably to be
expected given the regular influx of unmanaged devices as hordes of youth invade the halls of higher
learning.
Industry Profiles
Various industries exhibit substantially different threat profiles and therefore cannot have the same
remediationpriorities.Securitystandardsthattreatallrequirementsasequalsteppingstones onapathto
100%compliancearenoteffective.Thereisno“onesizefitsall”approach.
3
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Even within industries, there are widely distributed clusters of attack vectors. For instance, financial
services shows four distinct and widespread types of attacks.Information industries show seven clusters,
while accommodation show two clusters. On the other hand, there are clusters of attack vectors
containing several industries. Manysubsectors in different industries share a closer threat profile than do
subsectors in the same industry. For instance, two manufacturing subsectors have more in common with
centralbanksthantheyhavewitheachother.
These observations highlight the need for more thoughtful and thorough research into risk profiles across
various types of organizations. Maybe cyber risk has more to do with business models or organizational
structure or company policies than under which high-level industry a company falls. It follows that the
standard practice of organizing information-sharing groups and activities according to broad industries as
isthearrangementinthisreportislessthanoptimalandmayevenbecounterproductive.
Impact
The cost of data breaches was studied using information from 191 insurance claims for loss of payment
cards,personalinformation,andpersonalmedicalrecords.
Theaveragecostfor alostrecordbasedoncorporateestimates ofthecostof lostdatawas USD $201in
2014, up from $188 in 2013. However, based on insurance records, the actual average cost of a lost
recordwasUSD$0.58.
Part of this discrepancy is the exclusion of soft costs that don’t show up in the insurance data. Another
factor has to do with the extent of the loss. The larger the number of records lost, the less cost there was
per record. For losses of under 100 records, the average cost was about USD $1,000 per record. For
lossesof1,000records,theaveragecostwas$100perrecord.Forlossesof10,000records,theaverage
cost was $10 per record. For losses of 100,000 records, the average cost was $1.50 per record. For
losses of one million records, the average loss was $1 per record. For losses of ten million records, the
averagecostwas about$0.20perrecord.For losses of100millionrecords,the costwasabout$0.10per
record.
Larger organizations had higher costs per breach because they typically lost more records than smaller
organizationsandthushadhigheroverallcosts.
The Internet of Things (IoT)
No widely known IoT breaches have occurred. Most of the breaches reported in the media were proof of
concept.
However, the industry expects exponential growth of IoT over the next five years. Verizon predicts that
therewillbeover5billionIoTdevicesbytheendofthisdecade.
Many of the devices will be simple unitaskers. When developing IoT devices aimed at millions of
customers, cost is particularly important. Software to protect the device adds cost. It is fruitless to expect
thatsecuritywillhavethesamepriorityfromdevelopersasdoesdevicefunctionality.
Incidence Classification Patterns
96% of all incidences fell into one of nine categories. The frequency of incidences for different
classificationsfor2014aresummarizedbelow:
 Miscellaneouserrors–29.4%
 Crimeware–25.1%
 Insidermisuse–20.6%
4
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

 Physicaltheft/loss–15.3%
 Webappattacks–4.1%
 Denialofservice–3.9%
 Cyber-espionage–0.8%
 POSintrusions–0.7%
 Paymentcardskimmers–0.1%
The common denominator across the top four categories – accounting for over 90% of all incidents – is
people.
However,theaboveresults areforincidences.Thestoryonconfirmedbreachesisdifferent.Forinstance,
POS intrusions accounted for 0.7% of all incidences but 28.5% of all breaches. The frequency of
breachesforthevariouscategoriesfollows.Includedaretheindustriesmostaffectedbyeach.
 POSintrusions–28.5% (accommodations,entertainment,retail)
 Crimeware–18.8% (public,information,retail)
 Cyber-espionage–18% (manufacturing,public,professional)
 Insidermisuse–10.6% (public,healthcare,financialservices)
 Webappattacks–9.4% (information,financialservices,public)
 Miscellaneouserrors–8.1% (public,information,healthcare)
 Physicaltheft/loss–3.3% (public,healthcare,financialservices)
 Paymentcardskimmers–3.1% (financialservices,retail)
 Denialofservice–0.1% (public,retail,financialservices)
Year in Review
Thereportliststhemajormalwareinfectionsforeachmonthof2015:
Month Malware Impact
January Snapchat 4.5millioncompromisednamesandphonenumbers
February Kickstarter 5.6millionvictims
March KoreanTelecom Oneoftheyear’slargestbreachesaffecting12millioncustomers
April Heartbleed Firstofthreeopen-sourcevulnerabilitiesin2014
May eBay Databaseof145millioncustomerscompromised
June PFChang’s Mosthigh-profiledatabreachofthemonth
July EnergeticBear Cyber-spyingoperationdirectedattheenergyindustry
August Cybervor 1.2billioncompromisedcredentials
September iCloud Celebrityaccountshacked
October Sandworm AttackedaWindowsvulnerability
November SonyPictures Highest-profilehackoftheyear
December InceptionFramework Cyber-espionageattacktargetedthepublicsector
Wrap-Up
Thechangesinthereportforthis yearfromthepreviousyeararenotstatisticallysignificant.
Thereporttalliedthepercentageofincidentsinwhichacriticalsecuritycontrol(CSC)couldbeappliedas
therecommendedstrategy.Theresultsareshowninthetablebelow.
CriticalSecurityControl Percentage Category
Two-factorauthentication 24% Visibility/Attribution
Patchingwebservices 24% QuickWin
Internet-facingdevices 7% Visibility/Attribution
5
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Proxyoutboundtraffic 7% Visibility/Attribution
Webapplicationtesting 7% Visibility/Attribution
Userlockoutaftermultiplefailedattempts 5% QuickWin
Blockknownfile-transfersites 5% Advanced
Mailattachmentfiltering 5% QuickWin
Limitingportsandservices 2% QuickWin
Segregationofnetworks 2% Configuration/Hygiene
Passwordcomplexity 2% Visibility/Attribution
Restrictabilitytodownloadsoftware 2% QuickWin
Anti-virus 2% QuickWin
Vetsecurityprocessofvendor 2% Configuration/Hygiene
It is interesting to note that 40% of controls determined to be most effective were in the “Quick Win”
category.Thesearecontrolsthataretheeasiesttoimplement.
6
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com