parameters.
 On execution, the trade details are sent by the exchange to the clearinghouse, which stores the
trade details in its Trade Database (4). (This step replaces the earlier manual re-entry of trade
databythebroker/dealers.)
 Theresultsofthetrade(theexecutedorder)arereturnedtothebroker/dealer(5).
 At the end of the trading day, the exchange sends its entire trading history for the day to the
clearinghouse(6).
 Theclearinghousecompares thesetrades tothetrades alreadystored in its TradeDatabasethat
itreceivedduringthedayfromtheexchange.
 Ifthereisamismatch,thetradeisrejectedformanualresolution.
 For matchingtrades,thetrades arecleared.Thesecuritydepositoryis updatedtoreflectthe new
ownerships.
Now that manual trade reentries are no longer required of the broker/dealers, the number of trades
rejectedformanualresolutionisminimal,andtheexchangeisabletomeetitsSTPobligations.
Stock Exchange’s Business-Continuity Architecture Imposes Asymmetric
Failover Processing
Note that the exchange uses a four-CPU primary system and a two-CPU standby system for the
exchange applications. This mode of operation lessens the cost of software licensing and hardware.
However, it can lead to load shedding (or reduced response times due to less processing power) in the
event of a failover to the standby system. The exchange identified various non-critical applications (e.g.,
certain reporting subsystems) that will be taken offline in the event of a failover to reduce the overall
systemload.
Theexchange was usinganother replication producttoprovidedatareplication betweentheHPNonStop
servers in its active/passive disaster recovery pair. However, the exchange realized that it did not make
sense to have multiple replication products in production. It therefore moved to Shadowbase data
replication for its active/passive HP NonStop server replication. In future project phases, the exchange is
also considering moving to a higher level of business-continuity solution such as a fully active/active
architecture–aconfigurationsupportedbytheShadowbasedatareplicationengine.
Exchange Moves to Data Replication for Data Warehouse Feeds
Inadditiontoitstradingsystem,theexchangeprovides
a series of query nodes that act as data warehouses
for trading history, as shown in Figure 3. These data
warehouses are useful to broker/dealers who want to
follow a security over a period of time to help them
make purchase and sales decisions. The data
warehouses use MySQL databases running on Linux
servers.
At the current time, the exchange has deployed ten
data warehouse systems. Seven are collocated with
and are connected to the primary HP NonStop server,
and three are collocated with and are connected to the
standbyHPNonStopserver.
The previous approach used mini-batches of trading
Figure3–TheExchange’sOriginal
activity to update the data warehouse systems. These
DataWarehouses
5
©2014SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

were created periodically and shipped as flat files from the exchange servers to the data warehouses.
These files were then periodically loaded into the target database. This approach meant that the data
warehouseswereoftenlackingthelatestdatatosupportbrokerqueries.
The exchange moved to Shadowbase technology to provide heterogeneous, real-time transactional
replication of updates from the source HP NonStop databases into the target Linux/MySQL databases
(the data warehouses). The warehouse data is no longer stale. Trading activity is now replicated to the
data warehouses in real time tokeep the information in the data warehouses current with the exchange’s
tradingdatabase.
The Exchange’s Many Uses of Shadowbase Data Replication
Figure4–TheExchange'sManyUsesofShadowbaseDataReplication
Once the exchange chose Shadowbase software to meet its original heterogeneous replication
requirements, it subsequently discovered other key applications for the product, as discussed below. All
oftheseusesaresummarizedinFigure4.
Shadowbasefunctionality:
 provides active/passive replication between the exchange trading system’s HP NonStop servers
for the purpose of disaster recovery. Both HP NonStop SQL/MP and Enscribe databases are
replicated.
 replicates the validation data from the clearinghouse’s Sybase database running on an IBM AIX
to the HP NonStop SQL/MP Validation Database running on HP NonStop servers (the original
requirementtosolvetheexchange’smanualdata-entryproblem).
 replicatesreal-timetradingdatafrom theexchange’sHPNonStopSQL/MPdatabasestothedata
warehouses’ MySQL databases running on Linux systems, thus keeping the data warehouse
informationsynchronizedwiththecurrentstateoftheexchange’sprimarytradingdatabase.
6
©2014SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

The exchange’s use of the Shadowbase replication engine demonstrates its suitability for both business
continuityanddataandapplicationintegrationrequirements.
Moving to Continuous Availability
Withthecurrentactive/passivearchitectureusedbythestock exchangefor its tradingsystem,afailureof
the primary system could take the exchange down for a significant period of time – several minutes to
perhaps several hours. The downtime occurs because at the point of failure, management must first be
apprised of the situation and must approve the failover (often leading to extended decision time). The
failover must then be initiated (network switching, interface failovers, etc.), and the trading applications
mustbe brought up on the standbysystem with the databases opened for read/write access.Thesystem
must then undergo testing before it is put into service. All of these steps take time, and there are many
subtle problems that could lead to failover faults that prevent the standbysystem from being brought into
service,resultinginextendeddowntime.
The stock exchange is considering a Shadowbase Sizzling-Hot-Takeover (SZT) configuration to improve
availability. In an SZT configuration, the backup system has all applications loaded with all databases
mounted for read/write access. Each update made to the primary database is replicated across the
application network, thereby keeping all databases synchronized. The backup system is an active
system, except that it is not processing any update transactions. If the primary system fails, traffic is
simplyreroutedtothestandbynode,andfailover isaccomplishedinjustafewseconds.Ineffect,anSZT
systemisanactive/activesysteminwhichalltransactionsareroutedtojustonenode.
With this approach, the standby node is continuously tested by periodicallysending it test transactions to
ensure that it is end-to-end operational. This eliminates the need to take down the primary node for
testing, as is typically the case for an active/passive system. Therefore, there will be no failover faults,
andrecoverywillbefastandreliable.AnSZTarchitecturealsoavoidsdatacollisionswhichcanotherwise
occurwithafullyactive/activeconfiguration.
Summary
A stock exchange using a trading system built with HP NonStop servers faced a serious problem in that
highdata-entryerrorratesandtheresultingmanualreconciliationprocessrequiredtocorrecttheseerrors
preventedtheexchangefromcomplyingwithitssame-dayclearinggoals.
Working with its clearinghouse, the exchange re-architected its system to eliminate manual data re-entry.
Orders werepre-validatedtoensure thattheir formatwas consistentandcorrect, and theresultingtrades
were sent directly and electronically from the exchange to the clearinghouse. This eliminated the
necessity to manually reenter the information. A necessary part of the new architecture was the
requirement to replicate a Sybase Validation Database from the clearinghouse’s AIX system to a
NonStop SQL/MP database located on the exchange’s HP NonStop server trading system. The
exchange chose the Shadowbase replication engine, which provides data replication between
heterogeneoussystemsanddatabases,forthistask.
The exchange also manages several Linux/MySQL data warehouses that provide trading history to
traders. The data warehouses were originallyupdated periodicallyusing a batch-updating process. Again
making use of Shadowbase heterogeneous replication capabilities, the batch updates were replaced with
real-timetransactionaldatareplicationfrom theHPNonStopSQL/MPdatabasetotheMySQLdatabases.
Theresultisinformationinthedatawarehousesthatisnowcurrentwiththeprimarytradingsystem.
The exchange also deployed Shadowbase replication for disaster recovery of its HP NonStop-based
trading system (providing active/passive data replication between the primary and standby HP NonStop
servers). Because Shadowbase replication supports bi-directional replication, the exchange now has an
opportunity in the future to move to a continuously available SZT or to a fully active/active architecture,
therebyimprovingitsoverallapplicationavailability.
7
©2014SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Paul J. Holenstein is Executive Vice President of Gravic, Inc. He is responsible for the Shadowbase
suite of products. The Shadowbase replication engine is a high-speed, unidirectional and
bidirectional, homogeneous and heterogeneous data replication engine that moves data updates
between enterprise systems in fractions of a second. It also provides capabilities to integrate
disparate operational application information into real-time business intelligence systems.
Shadowbase Total Replication Solutions© provides products to leverage this technology with proven
implementations. For further information regarding Shadowbase data integration and application
integration capabilities that can assist in solving big data integration problems, please refer to the
companion documents Shadowbase Streams for Data Integration and Shadowbase Streams for
Application Integration, or visit www.Gravic.com/Shadowbase for more information. To contact the
author,pleaseemail:SBProductManagement@gravic.com.
8
©2014SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com
