High-Voltage Transformers – The Power Grid’s Achilles Heel
March2016
The U.S. power grid is extraordinarily reliable. It comprises a nationally connected
network of power substations thatcanberapidlyreconfiguredtosubstitutepower for any
substation that fails. Consequently, we seldom experience power failures that last for more than a few
minutes.Occasionally,our power maybeoutfor afew hours whilerepairs takeplace.Theseoutages are
generallycausedbyfaultsinthe“lastmile,”suchasatreefallingonpowerlines.
Outages that last days or weeks are highlyunusual, though theydo happen. In late October 2012, Super
Storm Sandyknockedoutpowertoover8,000,000residentsfortwoweeksormore.TheGreatNortheast
Blackout occurred in August 2003. It took out power for most of the Northeastern United States and a
large portion of neighboring Canada. Some areas were dark for a week or more. Ironically, this blackout
wascausedbyahigh-voltagetransmissionlinesaggingonahotdayintoanuntrimmedtree.1
The worst-case scenario is an event that causes the destruction of an extra-high-voltage (EHV)
transformer. These transformers are monstrous and vary in their characteristics. Thus, spares are not
available readily. It can take months to manufacture an EHV transformer; and because of its size, it can
take weeks to transport it to the substation needing the replacement. It is therefore imperative that power
from other sources be rerouted to the affected area so that the length of the power outage can be
contained.
1TheGreatNortheastBlackoutandthe$6BillionSoftwareBug,AvailabilityDigest;March2007.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/private/0203/northeast_blackout.pdf
1
©2016SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Fortunately, a recent initiative by the power industry has led to the design of a smaller transformer that
canbecombinedwithothersofasimilarsizetoreplacealargeEHVtransformer.Thesetransformerscan
be premanufactured and located near sensitive power substations as spares. If a large EHV transformer
shouldbedisabled,itcanbereplacedindaysratherthaninmonths.
The Unthinkable – A Year-Long Power Outage
WhatwouldhappeniftheentireUnitedStates(oramajorportionofit)lostpowerforayearormore?Ted
Koppel explores this disaster in his book, “Lights Out.”2 He paints a picture of absolute desolation.
Batteries would lose power, and we would lose our flashlights, cell phones, and portable radios.
Emergencygenerators would provide pockets of light until fuel ran dry. Gasoline stations could not pump
fuel when their tanks ran dry, even if they had generators. There would be no running water, without
which there would be no disposal capabilities for human waste. Supermarket and pharmacy shelves
would empty. Home-care patients reliant on ventilators and other medical equipment would die. Some
officials estimate that only one in ten people would survive a year without power – and without food or
water.
Worst of all, there are no government plans to handle such an emergency. The federal government and
most state and local governments have plans to handle limited power outages that last for a few days or
even for a few weeks. However, there are no plans in place for a year-long power outage. Interestingly,
Koppel points out that the Mormons are in the best position to weather such a disaster. Their faith calls
for stocking supplies to handle any disaster. Their organizational structure provides a strong top-down
hierarchythatensuresthereareamplecentralsuppliesthatcanbedistributedtotheir peopleintheevent
ofalongcatastrophe.Butwouldthesesupplieswithstandarmedassaultfromothersinneed?
In his interviews with top emergency officials, including those from FEMA (the U.S. Federal Emergency
Management Agency) and DHS (the U.S. Department of Homeland Security), Koppel discovered the
general attitude to be that such an outage could not happen; and if it did, they had no idea as to how to
prepareforit.
Could Such an Outage Occur?
But could such a catastrophe occur? It has been estimated by some officials that the disabling of as few
as nine critical substations could take out power to the majority of the United States. Koppel points out
threepossiblescenariosforamassivepoweroutagelastingayearormore:
CyberAttacks
The United States is powered by three major power grids – a western grid, an eastern grid, and a grid
largely centered around Texas. Computerized SCADA (Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition)
systems manage the distribution of power between and within these grids, ensuring local needs are met
evenwhenportionsofoneormoregridsaredown.
These systems coordinate with each other via Internet connections. However, the SCADA systems were
designed decades ago and do not include the security measures necessary to protect them from
hackers.3Wealreadyknowthatmalwareexistsinthesesystemstointerrogatetheinterconnectivityofthe
grid,afirststepforahackertodeterminehowtoattackthem.
2LightsOut,TedKoppel,CrownPublishers;2015.
AvailableonKindle.
3CanHackersTakeDownOurPowerGrid?,AvailabilityDigest;January2016.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/1101/power_grid_hacks.pdf
2
©2016SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

A sophisticated hacking attack could cause circuit breakers and other control equipment to be
reconfigured so as to damage substation equipment. Normal operating displays would be presented to
thesystemoperatorstopreventthemfromseeingtheattack.
PhysicalAttacks
There have been cases of deliberate physical attacks on power substations. Typically, saboteurs using
high-powered rifles or submachine guns fire at transformers and other substation equipment to disable
the substation. If a transformer is damaged by weapons fire, its cooling oil leaks out of the holes and
destroysthetransformer.Thetransformerhastobereplaced.
In one attack on the PG&E Metcalf Transmission Substation in April 2013, gunmen fired on seventeen
high-voltagetransformers,destroyingmostofthem.452,000gallonsofoilwerespilled.
ElectromagneticPulse
A high-altitude (200 miles or so) nuclear explosion creates a massive electromagnetic pulse (EMP) that
will result in damaging voltage and current surges in a power grid.5 An EMP pulse over the United States
easily will destroy many large transformers throughout the country. Rogue nations such as North Korea
arenearingthepotentialtolaunchsuchattacks.
Theelectricalsubstations ofmostmilitaryinstallations areprotectedfrom EMPpulsesviaFaradaycages,
a thin mesh of conducting material.6 The cost to protect the substations of the nation’s power grid with
Faradaycagesisminimal,butas yetthishasnotbeenundertaken.
ASimulatedAttackProvesDisastrous
Recently, the North American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC) led a simulated attack on the U.S.
power grid.7 NERC injected computer viruses into grid control systems, simulated bombed transformers
and substations, and knocked out dozens of power lines. DDoS (Distribute Denial of Service) attacks
were also made on several control computers. The tests involved 210 U.S. utility companies as well as
MexicanandCanadiancompaniesthatarepartoftheU.S.powergrid.
Though no actual operating equipment was affected, the simulated result was not good. Control
computers tore the system apart. DHS’s National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center
specialists took calls from electric industry technicians all over the country to assist them in recovering
from cyberattacks.Hundreds ofmajor transformers andtransmissionlines were damagedor destroyedin
simulation.TensofmillionsofAmericanswereleftwithoutpower.
The viruses injected into the control computers kept technicians in the control centers from knowing the
status of critical equipment, requiring the dispatching of several trucks with linemen to investigate. In
many cases, attempts by the linemen to enter power facilities were stymied by police officers who had
lockeddownlocationsbecauseofshooters.
The Weak Link – Large High-Voltage Transformers
Itis clear thatthe weak link inrestoring power from amajor attack onour electric grid arethelarge extra-
high-voltage (EHV) transformers. Though they comprise only 3% of the total number of transformers in
the grid, they carry 70% of the power. Most of them are custom-designed for a particular substation.
Therefore,itisimpracticaltomanufacturesparesfortheEHVtransformersineachsubstation.
4Metcalfsniperattack,Wikipedia.
5Nuclearelectromagneticpulse,Wikipedia.
6Faradaycage,Wikipedia.
7AreOurPowerGridsVulnerable?,AvailabilityDigest;December2013.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0812/power_grid_vulnerable.pdf
3
©2016SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

If such a transformer is damaged, it can take months to produce a replacement. Added to that is the
problem ofgettingthetransformertothesubstationsite.Thetransformersaresoheavythattheymustbe
carried onspecialtwelve-axletrailers.Theycannotbe moveduntil each state through which theyhave to
transit has certified that the bridges, roads, and tunnels can bear the weight and provide the clearance to
accommodate them. Just the movement from the factory to the substation can add weeks to the
replacementtime.
Most of the EHV transformers were originally moved to the substations via rail. However, that was
decadesago.Inmanycases,theraillinesnolongerexistorarenotserviceable.
Thus, if a major attack should take out a large number of EHV transformers in the U.S. power grid, it
could be months before electric service is restored to all users. The apocalypse described by Koppel in
hisbookwillhavehappened.Electricitytomostofthenationcouldbeunavailableformonths.
RecX to the Rescue
WhatisneededforEHVtransformersisarapidreplacementstrategywithuniversalspares.Aconsortium
led by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security launched a Rapid Recovery Transformer (RecX)
program. The goal was to develop a conventional, oil-filled transformer that easily could be transportable
and quickly installable within one week. The result was a single-phase transformer that allowed multiple
units to be coupled together to provide three-phase power of whatever capacity was needed to replace a
failed EHV transformer. The single transformers were economical enough to be manufactured in quantity
and stored near criticalsubstations as spares.Theyweresmallenoughso thattheycould betransported
easily.8
Atrial was run withthe RecX transformers in March 2012. A trioof single-phase 345/134-kvtransformers
were disassembled, loaded into specially designed trailers, transported more than 900 miles, and
reassembled to replace an existing three-phase EHV transformer.The entire operation was completed in
less than five and a half days. The RecX prototype spare is still in operation and is working as originally
planned.
Summary
Currently, the U.S. Department of Energy is preparing to submit to the U.S. Congress a plan requesting
the creation of a strategic reserve of spare RecX transformers. The plan will include the total number of
transformersandthetotalmegawattsrequiredaswellasthestrategiclocationsfortransformerstorage.
As asidenote,asystem dubbedAssetShield is being introducedtoprotectlarge power transformers and
othersubstationequipmentfromballisticattacks.AssetShieldisanimpactprotectionsystem thatreduces
thekineticenergyofbulletstothepointthattheywillnotdamageequipment.
8RecX:Prototypesparetransformersetsthestageforsubstationrecovery,ElectricEnergyOnline;November/December2015.
4
©2016SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com