Calculating Availability – Heterogeneous Systems Part 2
May2008
InPart 1of this series,1wereviewedtheelementaryprobabilityconcepts thatapplytocalculating
availability. In this Part 2 of our series, we first briefly review these concepts; and we then apply
them to redundant systems in which the nodes do not have the same availability(an assumption
that we have made up to this point). We consider the impact on system availability of non-
symmetricalfailovertimes,failoverfaults,anddual-nodefailures.
A Review of Probability Fundamentals
When analyzing availability, we are concerned with binary states. Either a system is up, or it is
down.
A binary state can be defined by three logical Boolean functions – AND, OR, and NOT. For
instance,atwo-nodesystem is upif Node1 is upOR if Node2 is up.This is equivalent tosaying
thatatwo-noderedundantsystemisupifNode1ANDNode2areNOTdown.
The following statements summarize the Boolean probability relationships. Let p(x) be the
probabilitythatxistrue.Then:
 TheANDoperatorimpliesmultiplication.TheprobabilitythatxANDyaretrueisp(x)p(y).
 TheORoperatorimpliesaddition.TheprobabilitythatxORyistrueisp(x)+p(y).2
 TheNOToperatorimpliesthecomplement.TheprobabilitythatxisNOTtrueis1-p(x).
For instance, consider a two-node system with each node having an availability of a. That is, the
probability that a node will be up is a. The probability that the system is up is the probability that
Node 1 AND Node 2 are up OR that Node 1 is up AND Node 2 is down OR that Node 2 is down
andNode1isup.Usingtheaboverules,thisis
a2+a(1-a)+(1-a)a=a2+2a(1-a) (1)
Alternatively, the probability that the system is up is the probability that both nodes are NOT
down. This can be expressed logically as NOT (Node 1 is down AND Node 2 is down), which
resultsin
1-(1-a)(1-a)=1-(1-a)2 (2)
AlittlealgebraicmanipulationwillshowthatEquations(1)and(2)areequivalent.
1CalculatingAvailability–HeterogeneousSystemsPart1,AvailabilityDigest;March2008.
2Thisistrueifxandyaremutuallyexclusive.Iftheyarenot,thentheprobabilitythatxoryistrueisp(x)+p(y)–p(x)p(y).
1
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Onemustbecarefulwhenmakingsimplifications.InEquation(1),itistemptingtosaythatthe
secondtermcanbeignoredifaisveryclosetoone;andtherefore(1-a)isverysmall.However,
thisleadstoasystemavailabilityofa2.Thisisanabsurditysinceitsaysthataddingasparenode
reducesthesystemavailability.
Application to Heterogeneous Systems
Let us now apply these concepts to some cases of heterogeneity. For simplicity’s sake, we will
limit the examples to dual-node, single-spared configurations. That is, the system remains up in
thepresenceofanysingle-nodefailurebutisdownifbothnodesfail.
Failover
When we consider failover, we realize that there are two cases in which users will be without
service:
 ifbothnodesfail,asweanalyzedabove.
 whenonenodefailsuntiltheothernodeisbroughtintoservice.Thisisthefailovertime.
Weanalyzedtheimpactoffailover timeextensivelyinour articleentitledCalculatingAvailability–
Failover in our February, 2007, issue. Let us analyze failover for a dual-node, single-spared
systemusingprobabilityprinciples.
Wedefinethefollowing:
p(up)=a=theprobabilitythatanodewillbeup(nodeavailability).
p(down)=(1-a)=theprobabilitythatanodeisdown(thatis,itisnotup).
p(failover)= theprobabilitythatthesystemisdownduringafailoverperiod.
Weneedtoknowwhatp(failover)is.Let
MTFO = the mean time to fail over (the average time that users are down while the
backupisbeingbroughtintoservice).
mtbf=themeantimebetweenfailuresforanode.
mtr=themeantimetorepairanode.
A=systemavailability(theprobabilitythatauserisreceivingservice).
Assumethat we are dealing with atwo-node active/activesystem,andthereforethere will be two
nodefailuresontheaverageduringeachmtbfperiod.Thus,theprobabilitythatthesystemwillbe
downduringfailoveris
MTFO
mtbf/2
However, from the users’ viewpoint, only half of the users are affected. Therefore, the effective
availabilityishalfthatabove,and
MTFO
p(failover) foranactive/activesystem (3a)
mtbf
Notingthata=1–mtr/mtbf,wecanexpressmtbfas
2
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

mtr
mtbf 
(1a)
and
MTFO MTFO
p(failover)  (1a) (3b)
mtbf mtr
The probability that the system will be down is the probability that Node 1 AND Node 2 have
failedORthatafailoverisinprocess:
MTFO
p(user beingdown)(1a)2  foractive/activesystems (4a)
mtbf
Note that this is true for active/active systems. For an active/standby system, only the failure of
the primarysystem will cause a failover. Therefore, the factor of mtbf/2 becomes mtbf. However,
now all users are affected, so that the probability of user downtime is increased by a factor of 2.
Theresultisthat
MTFO
p(user beingdown)(1a)2  foractive/standbysystems (4b)
mtbf
The probability of user downtime is the same for active/active systems as it is for active/standby
systems,thoughfordifferentreasons.
Let us look at some practical cases. Consider a dual-node, singly-redundant system with nodes
thathaveanmtbfof4,000hours(about6months)andanmtr(meantimetorepair)offourhours.
This results in a nodal availability of three nines (1 - 4/4000 = 0.999). According to Equation (2),
thisdual-nodesystemwillhaveanavailabilityofsixninesiffailovertimeisignored.
Case1:ColdStandby
Following a node failure, a cold standby system must have its database and applications loaded
and the applications started. Let us assume that it takes four hours to bring up a cold standby. In
thiscase,
4
p(userbeingdown)=.0012  106 .001.001
4000
A 0.999
In this case, failover time is predominant. It has reduced a system with six 9s availability to one
withthree9savailability,justthatofasinglenode.
Case2:HotStandby
A hot standby system is kept ready to take over by keeping its database synchronized with the
activesystem via datareplication.Letus assumethat ittakes six minutes (0.1hours) tobringthe
hotstandbyonline.Then
0.1
p(userbeingdown)=.0012  106 2.5x105 2.6x105
4000
3
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

A=0.999974
Failover time is still predominant, but the system availability is now more than four 9s, much
betterthanthatofasinglenode.
Case3:Active/Active
In an active/active configuration, both nodes are actively running the application. Therefore, all
that is required following a node failure is to switch users from the failed node to the surviving
node,aprocessthatcanbeaccomplishedinseconds.
Letusassumethatswitchovertakesthreeseconds.Thatmeansthatfollowinganodefailure,half
oftheuserswillbedownforthreeseconds.Inthiscase,
3/3600
p(userbeingdown)=.0012  106 .2x106 1.2x106
4000
A 0.9999988
The system availability is a little less than six 9s, close to what it would be if failover time were
zero.Inthiscase,failovertimeisnotamajorfactorinsystemavailability.
Thisisthephilosophybehindactive/activesystems–letitfail,butfixitfast.
Note that if HP Nonstop systems with four 9s availability were to be used for the active/active
nodes, the failure probability due to a dual-node failure would be 10-8. In the above failover case,
thesystemavailabilitywouldbe2.1x10-7,leadingtoasystemavailabilityofalittlelessthanseven
9s.Failovertimeinthiscaseisimportantandcanbethelimitingfactorinsystemavailability.
FailoverFaults
Amajorprobleminredundantsystemsisfailoverfaults.Afailoverfaultisthefailureofthebackup
system to take over. Failover is a very complex process and is difficult to test. Therefore, the
probabilitythatafailoverwillfailmaynotbeinsignificant.
If failover faults are considered, there will be a dual-system failure in an active/active system if
one node fails AND if the second node fails while the first node is down OR if one node fails and
