Cyber Security and Downtime
Dr.TerryCritchley
May2016
A few years ago, I wrote an article for the Availability Digest on Software Reliability,
which comprised aspects of software and its development in aiding high availability of IT
services:
Software Reliability Models: The Use of Defect Density as a Basis for the Prediction of Software
Reliability
(http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0808/software_reliability.pdf)
Thispaperisafollow-onfromthatjourneyintoproducingreliablesoftware.
Review of Availability Numbers
Theavailabilityofaservicecanbedefinedbytheenduseras:
Availability(A)= x100(%)
Non-availability(1-A)= x100(%)
Traditional thinking about high availability often confuses system availability with service availability. In a
nutshell, system availability means that the hardware and software is working and no parts of it are down
(not functioning); but this does not mean that the service, for example online orders, is fully available. In
the case of software, it may be that it is functioning but not doing what it is supposed to be doing in the
waytheenduserexpects.
An example might be year-end processing. The program has been working as planned all year, but the
year-endprocessingparthasneverbeenaccessedinnormalprocessing.Whenitputtouseattheendof
the year, the program is found to be running through its code but producing erroneous results for the
users. The operations people will swear that everything is working fine, but to the end user it most
certainly isn't. This is what I call a logical outage or downtime, of which there are many examples, some
ofwhicharecoveredinReference1.
Outage Causes
Thecausesofoutagesareasnumerousasleavesonatree,andinclude:
 hardwareandsoftwarefailures,eithertotalorpartialwhereonlycertainusersareaffected.This
canbeabliporadisasterinwhichthewholesystemisblitzedoutofactioninsomeway.
1
©2016SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

 environmentaleventssuchasfloods,lightning,overheatingandnumerousothers.
 variouslogicaloutages.
 cyberattacksormalware
Cyber Attacks and Availability
The threat of cyber attacks is relatively new and was unheard of in the heady mainframe days of the
1970s and 1980s. It is here today and is rapidly on the increase, both numerically and with respect to
damagepotentialandintensity.
Again,traditionalthinkingsaysthatacyberattack,althoughanuisance,doesnotconstituteanoutage-a
nuisance, yes, but not an outage. This is not borne out by experience, and there are numerous papers
thathavebeen publishedbackingthis inferenceup.TheyincludeareporttotheIT advisorycommitteeof
the President of the United States. One of the papers I saw showed a 20-fold increase in cyber attacks
between 1995 and 2005 (in the thousands), so you can imagine the numbers today. Targets for these
attackscoverawidespectrumandinclude:
 personal;yourPC/tabletandmine.
 socialmediasuchasdatingsiteswithaviewtoextortionorblackmail.Twitterhassufferedfrom
multipleattacks.
 financesystemswithaviewtoobtainingmoneyinsomeway.
 militaryandothergovernmentsitesforespionageorsabotagepurposes.
There are many types of cyber/malware attacks that arrive as new threats or as mutations of older ones
to which an antidote has been developed. It is pointless tocover them all here,especiallyas I don't know
them all. All I know is that manyare disruptive and some quite malicious. The basic problems theymight
causeare:
 lockingoutfurthersystemaccessuntilaransomispaid.AnexampleisUkash,whichisnow
eliminated.
 floodingasitewithfaketraffictocauseittoslowdownorshutdownbecauseofexcessiveload,
suchasadistributeddenialofservice(DDoS)attack.
 fileencryptionwhere,again,aransomisdemandedforthekeytounlockthefiles.Examplesare
ransomwareandvariations.
 theftofdata,particularlythatofmonetaryvaluetotheperpetrator(s)suchasbankaccount
details.Examplesarebotnets1.Theseattacksare oftensurreptitiousandnotimmediately
apparentandareespeciallypersistentthreatswhichresideonasystemandspringintolifeevery
sooften.
 destructionoralterationofdataormetadata,suchasindexesorsystemsoftware.
Whatever the cause, the attack is likely to cause an outage or hiatus of some sort. Even the non-
disruptivedatatheftwillcauseanoutagesinceoncedetected,itisunlikelythesitewillcontinueoperating
as normal. A disaster recovery site may possibly be of no avail since it too may have duplicated dubious
datafromtheprimarysystem.
So, cyber attacks will almost certainlycause outages of variable durations which cannot be forecast. The
solutions are beyond this paper (and most people too), but the fact of this article is to help recognize the
impactonsystemanddataavailabilityofcyberattacks.
1 Aroundthedateofthispaper(2010)itwasestimatedthatbotnetsinfectednearly10millionsystems.
2
©2016SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Impact of Cyber Attacks
Firstly, some sites are reluctant to admit these sort of attacks for multiple reasons, not least of which is
the fact that it advertises that 'we are open for illicit access, folks', a clarion call to the cyber thief.
Secondly, it is often difficult to determine the scope of any damage caused by such attacks, the solution
forrecovery,andhowtoensureitdoesn'thappenagain.
ThePreponderanceofCyberAttacks
Asurveyoutlinedinreference32.showsthefollowingresponsesfromrespondents:
 26%reportedthattheattackhadaseriousorsustainedimpactonITnetworkswithsomeeffect
onoperations.
 23%reportedthattheattackhadeffectsonoperations,causingreputationaldamage3orservice
interruption.
 12%reportedthattheattackhadaserioussustainedeffectonoperations,suchasenvironmental
damage,floodsetc.
 4%reportedthattheattackcausea'criticalbreakdown'inoperations.
The survey asked the correspondents to estimate the costs of such outages, and they came up with an
averagefigurefora24houroutageof$6.3m.Thesearebigbucksinanybody'slanguage.
Reference 4. below, appropriately called 'Victimology,' reported that businesses reported almost 324,000
hours of downtime due to some form of cybercrime, though I'm not sure of the sample size. Either way,
it'sabignumber.
OtherImpacts
These attacks are not confined to certain industries' enterprise systems. They include data centers,
disasterrecoverysites,andevenindustrialcontrolsystemsthatmonitorandcontrolanumberofindustrial
facilities. These include military and public utility control systems. There have been recent incidents
involvingelectricgridsystems,notablyoneintheUkraine,coveredintheAvailabilityDigestarticle:
HowTheUkrainePowerGridWasHacked
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/1103/ukraine_outage.pdf
and the other article referenced in it. The outcome of such attacks goes far beyond just financial loss, as
youmightimagine.
TheSolution?
Solving this problem taxes greater minds than mine, but foolproof solutions evade us though there are
manypartialsolutionsandsolutionspecificationsaround.Thebiggestissueistheinternet'smainpurpose
in life, which is an openly accessible network with everyone able to talk to everyone else. Thus, the
internet'smainadvantageisnowbecomingitsbiggestdisadvantage.
Combinatorial Testing
A NIST (National Institute of Standards and Technology, USA) paper tackles the problems of software
reliability and cyber security in an article outlining the concept of combinatorial testing. Combinatorial
testing is a method that can reduce cost and increase the effectiveness of software testing for many
2 Thesurveycovered600ITandsecurityexecutivesacross14countries,includingtheUSA.
3 Thiscanhaveamassivefinancialeffectonsomecompanies.
3
©2016SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

applications. The key insight underlying this form of testing is that not every parameter contributes to
everyfailureandmostfailuresarecausedbyinteractionsbetweenrelativelyfewparameters:
COMBINATORIALTESTINGFORCYBERSECURITYANDRELIABILITY
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistbul/itlbul2016_05.pdf
Also,seethereferenceswithinthedocumentaboveformoreinformationonthistopicplusareasofuse.
First Line of Defense
TheCoreropapers below areusefuladjuncts totheones attheendof this article whichexpanduponthe
problem and its effects. The papers outline solution areas to mitigate these attacks, suggesting the user
sideofthefirewalldefenseasthelocationforyourcybercrimeredoubt.
FirstLineofDefensetoProtectCriticalInfrastructure
http://csrc.nist.gov/cyberframework/rfi_comments/040813_corero.pdf
CoreroNetworkSecurityFirstLineofDefenseOverview
http://www.dotforce.it/wp-
content/uploads/2014/08/Corero_First_Line_of_Defense_Solution_Overview_140916.pdf
Summary
Cyber attacks are here to stay and are not only breeding like rabbits but are growing into something
bigger and stronger. The biggest problem in this area is the openness of the internet and the relatively
easyaccess toanyservices usingit.Iam baffledas towhyatopsecretsystem suchas theUSDoD and
othermilitarilysensitivesitesareattachedtosuchawide-openfacility.
Despite today's hardware and software being highly reliable, the problem of prolonged or short but
damaging outages is not going away. Human finger trouble, accidental or deliberate, and cyber criminals
are upping the ante in the availability stakes; and unless the IT world matches it, it will have to fold its
hands.
Ihavesomehalf-bakedideasaboutwaystoapproachtheproblem,thoughnotaspecifiablesolution;and
they are based on the sports principle that attack is the best form of defense. I may specify it further one
day.
References
1.HighAvailabilityITServices [Dec24 2014]
https://www.crcpress.com/High-Availability-IT-Services/Critchley/9781482255904
2.HighPerformanceITServices [dueJuly16]
https://www.crcpress.com/High-Performance-IT-Services/Critchley/9781498769198
3.TrustandTrustworthyComputing:ThirdInternationalConference,TRUST2010
[editedbyAlessandroAcquisti,SeanSmith,Ahmad-RezaSadeghi]
https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=H7ZtCQAAQBAJ&pg=PA339&dq=downtime+cyber+attacks&hl=en&
sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwj25Kjmt9vMAhVlJ8AKHa_PAP4Q6AEIRjAD#v=onepage&q=downtime%20cyber%2
0attacks&f=false
4.Victimology
https://books.google.co.uk/books?isbn=0323296386
[WilliamG.Doerner,StevenP.Lab-2014]
4
©2016SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com