Backup Is More Than Backing Up
May2009
So youthink thatyourcorporatedataissafe?Yourcompany’sdataisits lifeblood.Loseitwithout
thechanceofrecovery,andyourcompanywilllikelygooutofbusiness.
Will Your Backup Be There?
But protecting your data is more than just backing it up periodically. This was graphically
illustrated by the misfortune that befell JournalSpace. As described in our Never Again article
Why Back Up?, published in our last issue (April 2009) of the Availability Digest, we discussed
how JournalSpace was put out of business because of the failure to back up its database. After
five years of rapid growth, the popular blogging host lost its entire database due to the nefarious
actionsofadisgruntledITmanager.
JournalSpace management had been assured by its IT manager that its data was properly
backed up. However, his concept of “back up” was to provide a reliable database via a RAID
system. After all, since the database would survive a disk failure, in effect a second copy was
always available. In JournalSpace’s case, they did not lose their database due to a dual disk
failure.Rather,theylostitbecausethedisgruntledITmanagerwipeditoutashewasbeingfired.
Will Your Restore Procedure Work?
Inresponsetothisarticle,onereaderwrote:
“Just looking over the digest - very good stuff. I must admit the account of JournalSpace is quite
horrific. And make the additional point that even if you do backups, you must test them. Just
becauseyouhavebackedupyourdatadoesn'tmeanyoucanrestoreit!!!!!regardsDarrenM”
Repeat–Justbecauseyouhavebackedupyourdatadoesn’tmeanyoucanrestoreit.
This lesson was learned through the painful experiences of a credit-collections company
described in our February, 2007, article entitled Don’t Wait for the Other Shoe to Drop. The
company faced a catastrophic failure of two RAID disks just before the holiday season. No –
problem – the IT staff had diligently backed up the database using a remote backup service, and
theyhadaspareserverthattheycouldputintoproduction.
At this point, they realized their problem. They had never tested the backup procedure with the
spareserver.Thespareserver wasconfigureddifferently,andthebackupkeptgivingan“internal
consistencyerror”message.Ittookthreeweekstofullyrecoverthesystem.
1
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Will You Know How To Restore Your Database?
Anotherreaderrespondedwithanevenmoresubtleproblem:
“RE:NeverAgain,WhyBackUp?
Anotherveryinterestingand…unfortunateexperience.
IrealizedsomethingasIreadthisarticle-thatevensituationsthataremaliciousintheir make-up
can be guarded against just like those caused by natural disaster, hardware failure or just plain
user-stupidity.
Here’s what I also realized – a real flaw in our catastrophe plan. First, the good and the bad (for
whatit’sworth):
 Wedohavebetterthanaveragehardwareredundancy:
o RAIDarrayonallservers.
o Multiplepowersuppliesonmostdevices.
o Unfortunately, we do not have dedicated AC circuits and multiple UPS devices for the
multiplepowersupplies…
 WealsodonothaveabackupT-1(ourmainweakpointasweexperienceabout1-2hoursof
downtimeperyearonaverage).
 We do have local daily backups shared across servers and onsite storage devices, and we
doincrementalbackupsoffsitedailyandkeepseveralversionsofeveryfileanddatabase.
 We periodically unit-test various restore and recovery procedures to make sure we can
actuallygetbackthedataifweloseit.
Nowfortheflaw:
 TheflawistheITguyinthiscase(asyouwillsoonsee).
 Iknowhowtorestorejustaboutanythingwehave.
 BUT each various restore comes with its own specifics, namely ‘locations’, ‘directions,’
‘procedures,’and,ofcourse,‘quirks’(exceptions).Let’scallthesethe‘procedures.’
Half of these procedures are documented – some in a binder on a shelf, some on a server, and
some I just know how to do from experience. For all intents and purposes, even if I lose the
server procedure docs and I lose the binder, I could still restore our system (files, databases and
websites)withtheassistanceofonlyoneotherguywehaveundercontract.
Thefundamentalflawis–me.WhatifIdieinthebuildingwhenitcollapsesontopoftheservers?
What if I am hit by a bus? Nothing is documented in full or in one central location in such a
fashionthatanoutsideservicecouldbehiredtowalkinandstarttherestoreprocess.
Unfortunately, my boss probably won’t allow me to spend the time properly documenting the
processashedoesn’tseetheimportanceofit…untilaservergoesdownandIshowupdeadfor
workthatday.”
Inaseparatecommentary,thisreadergoesontosay:
“Ithinkthefoolishthingthatmostsmallerorganizationsdoisjustneverfollowthroughwiththefull
gamut of procedural completeness (testing, documentation, rehearsed rollbacks) – not so much
an attitude of ‘it can’t happen to us.’ but more an attitude of ‘I can cut a couple of corners here
2
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

and bottom line (dollars and cents), I think we can come out a little bit ahead.’Cross your fingers
andgowithit.”
These statements say it all. If the staff member who knows how to do your database restore is
not available, will you be able to recover? Even if the restore procedures are documented, are
they correct? Are they clear? Documented procedures must be tested. This means having
someone who is not familiar with the procedures (though technically qualified) follow them to
ensure correctness and clarity. Such a test will uncover incorrect steps, steps that are not clear,
andstepsthat,thoughobvioustothedocumenter,havebeenleftout.
Do You Know That Your Backups Are Actually Being Taken?
Another of our readers1 relates the story of a small company that entrusted its end-of-day
backups to a young operator. To ensure that the backups were faithfully taken, the operator had
tomaintainalogofherbackupactivitiesandtheIDsandcontentsofallofthebackuptapes.
Unfortunately, this young operator was more concerned about her after-hour activities than she
was about her backup responsibilities. When one fateful day the company lost its database and
hadtorestoreitfrom thebackups,theyfoundtotheir chagrinthattherewerenocurrentbackups.
Thelogentriesthatshehadmadewereallbogus.
This raises the issue of backup auditing. How do you know that your backups are, in fact, being
madeandmadeproperly?Thisisanissuewhichmustbefaced.
Backup Issues to Consider
RecoveryPointObjective
Fundamental to all backup policies is a company’s recovery point objective, or RPO. This is the
amount of data loss that can be tolerated following a failure. It is a compromise between the cost
ofbackupfrequencyandthevalueofthedata.
Some applications can tolerate hours or even days of lost data, especially if transactions are not
high value or if there is a manual process that can be used to reconstruct the lost data. Other
applications can tolerate only minutes or seconds of lost data, while others can tolerate no lost
data.
Ifmagnetictapeorvirtualtapeisused,theamountofdatathat willbelostisthatgeneratedsince
the last full or incremental backup, ignoring lost data on tape that didn’t get out of the building
before the fire. This typically represents an RPO measured in hours or days. Most online backup
servicesalsofallinthiscategory.
If the RPO is to be measured in minutes or seconds, asynchronous replication is generally the
solution.Ifnodatacanbelost(RPO=0),synchronousreplicationmustbeused.
In most enterprise data centers, different applications will have different RPO requirements. The
backupproceduresforsomeapplicationsmaywellbedifferentfromthoseofothers.
BackupAvailability
In the event of a disaster, will your backup be available? If you back up to tape, those backup
tapes should be immediatelymoved to an offsite location. In the case of the terrible 9/11 disaster
1ThankstoPhilGrossman.
3
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

in New York City, there was at least one case in which all the backup tapes for a company’s
databasefellwiththerestoftheWorldTradeCenter.
Tape backup is the classic backup solution, but it has some unique problems. Tapes have been
known to be lost due to a vehicle accident or theft as they are being transported to or from the
offsite facility. When a database restore is needed, the tapes must first be retrieved. If they are
stored in some third-party vault, you may have to wait a while before they can be delivered to
you. Once delivered, more than one restore has failed because a tape was unreadable. How
manytimesdoyouallowatapetobereused?Doyoumaketwocopiesofabackup?
If you back up via virtual tape or via data replication to disk, are you backing up to a remote site
that is far enough away so that it will not be destroyed along with your primary site due to some
commondisaster?
BackupAudit
Backups to remote disk via virtual tape or data replication can be automated so you know that
they are being done at the specified intervals. Large tape farms are also generally automatically
auditedsothatyouknowthatyourITstaffisappropriatelytakingbackups.
However,thousands of small businesses backinguptheir data viatape are dependingupon their
IT staff to be diligent in doing so. What safeguards do they have in place to ensure that backups
arenotonlybeingdoneaccordingtotheirbackuppolicybutarebeingsafelystoredoffsite?
In today’s new world of the Internet, a very useful alternative to tape backup is to use an online
backup service. These services automatically and transparently search your server for changed
files and upload them to their servers over the Internet. At any time, you can download selected
files to replace lost or damaged files. Many servers even store several revisions so that you can
restore a file that has been erroneously overwritten. At the Availability Digest, we use such a
service, Carbonite. Of course, you must ensure that the security of data provided by such an
onlineservicemeetsyoursecuritypolicies.
RestoreTesting
Restore procedures are useful onlyif they work. Just likefailover to a backup system,restoring a
backup database must be periodically tested. If there is a backup system, this can be done by
restoring the database to the backup system and ensuring that it works. How this is done
dependsuponthebackuptechniqueused.
 If magnetic tape is used, the latest backup (the latest full backup plus any subsequent
incremental backups) must be retrieved and used to reload the database. If a third-party
offsite tape storage service is used, this is a good opportunity to ensure that the provider
can meet its service-level agreement for prompt delivery (do you have one?).
Furthermore, this is the best kind of audit that can be made to ensure that backups are
beingproperlytaken.
 If virtual tape or data replication to a backup disk subsystem is used, that subsystem
shouldbemountedonabackupsystemandensuredthatitiscorrect.
 If an active/active system is being used, one in which there are two or more
geographically-distributed copies of the database in active use, then it is known that the
“backup”is,infact,proper;andnotestingisrequired.
4
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

RestoreDocumentation
As our reader confessed, proper restore procedures are only useful if they can be properly
performed. True, the IT operator charged with backup/restore responsibilities can probably do it
flawlessly.Butifheisnotavailable,istheresomeonewhocanactinhisplace?
Thiscanbeassuredonlywithproperdocumentation.Howdo youknowthatthedocumentationis
proper?Onlybyhavingsomeonenotfamiliar withthe documentationattempttodoarestore with
nohelpwhatsoever.Ifhestumbles,correctorclarifythewrittenprocedures.
BackupDocumentation
Of course, all of the restore capability in the world is not going to do any good if there is no
database backup available. What happens if the one IT person you have on board who knows
howtobackupgets(Godforbid)hitbyatruck?Istheresomeonewhocantakeoverhisrole?
Thewaytoensurethesurvivabilityofabackupcapabilityistomakesurethatbackupprocedures
aredocumentedandtestedjustasarerestoreprocedures.
ProtectingAgainstMalfeasance
This leads us to our finalbackupissue,andthat is nefarious or accidental acts thatcandestroya
database and its backups no matter how well they are planned and executed. Though it may be
hardtodo,onemustbeparanoidaboutbackupsecurity.Notonlyisitnecessaryformanagement
to be well aware of backup policies and their proper execution, but the possibility of a distraught
employee or perhaps even an external hacker destroying the backup data must be carefully
considered.
At the very least, the backup data must be secured. Best practices would dictate that it would
taketheconcurrence of atleasttwo peopletomodifyabackupdatabase in anyway.This makes
sense if the backup is a remote disk subsystem since a security scheme requiring two
independentpasswordscanbedevised.
However, what about the case in which an employee is charged with taking magnetic tapes
offsite and perhaps storing them in his house, which is often done. If he is the one that is
disgruntled,goodluck ongettingthebackupsreturnedwhenneeded.Perhapsthepolicyoughtto
be that two employees are involved, taking possession of backup tapes on alternate days. Then,
at least, the exposure is limited. Of course, storing tapes using a third-party storage service
solvesthisproblem.
A corollary to this relates to active/active systems. Any operator command that can be issued
against all databases in the application network should be disabled. Access to each copy of the
databaseshouldbeseparatelyprotectedandaccessibleonlytodifferentpersonnel,
Summary
If your company’s survival depends upon its data (as many do), proper backup/restore
procedures are amatter ofcorporate lifeor death.This requires notonlythatthe backupstrategy
supporttherequiredRPObutthatallbackupandrestoreproceduresbedocumented,tested,and
audited.
5
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com