Protect Your Data Center from Flooding
January2016
If you are a datacenter manager, nothing can ruin your day more than your data center
floodingout.Asimpossibleasthismaysound,itdoeshappen.Itmaynotbeyourservers
that areunderwater.It mayjustbe your backupgenerator or fuel pumps that are locatedinthebasement
ofyourbuilding.However,theeffectisthesame.YourITservicesareunavailabletoyourusers.
You maythink that your data centers are safe now. However, rising sea levels due to global warming will
overtake many data centers in the next few decades. Now is the time to start planning for such an
eventuality.Do youmove yourdatacenter?Doyouhardenit?Do youprovideasaferemotebackupdata
centerwithtestedfailoverprocedures?
Inthis article, welook atsomereal-lifedatacenter floods.Wereview governmentalstudies thatshowthat
the probability of flooding will increase over the likely life of many data centers. And we suggest some of
the actions that you might want to consider now to protect your data center if it becomes a victim to a
flood.
Vodafone Suffers Multiday Outage from Flooding Over Christmas
Vodafone, the world's second largest mobile telecommunications company, suffered a devastating flood
thattook outoneof itsmajor datacenters intheU.K. over theChristmas weekendof 2015.InDecember,
asuccessionofseverestormshittheBritishIsles.Thousandsofhomeswereflooded,wide-spreadpower
outagesoccurred,androadswereblockedbylandslidesorwerewashedout.
After several days of storms,theAireriver rosetounprecedentedlevels.Cresting atover ninefeetabove
floodstage,thehighestever recorded, it inundated thecityof Leeds.In doing so,itfloodedtheVodafone
facilitylocatedinLeeds,takingoutvoiceanddataservicesformillionsofpeopleinthenorthernU.K.
Engineers were rushed to Leeds to repair the damage and to restore service. However, because of the
flooding, they were unable to get into the Vodafone facility for several days. It was not until Monday,
December28th,thattheywereabletobringallvoiceanddataservicesbackonline.
This was not the first time that Vodafone had faced a flood. In September, 2009, flash floods caused six-
feet of water to sweep through Istanbul, Turkey. By the time Vodafone realized that something was
wrong,itfacedthelossof25%ofitsnetwork capacityinTurkey.Itsmajordatacenter was wellonits way
to being submerged. Among other services provided by the systems in the data center were two Home
Location Registers (HLRs). These are the systems that track the whereabouts of mobile customers and
establishconnectionsbetweenthem.
Repair personnel entered thefloodeddata center and found that theHLR disks hadnot beensubmerged
yet. They were located on the top shelf of their server racks. The Vodafone personnel retrieved the disks
1
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

and installed them at another site in Ankara. Subscribers were rehomed to Ankara, and service was
restoredwithin24hours.
Superstorm Sandy Flooded Data Centers in Lower Manhattan
Superstorm Sandy was the largest Atlantic storm in recorded history. Hitting the U.S. East Coast on
October 29, 2012, it inundated lower Manhattan. Lower Manhattan is one of the world’s densest
communicationandcomputinghubs.
Some streets were awash in feet of water. New York City tunnels, subways, power substations, and
basements wereflooded.It took days to pumpoutthe water.Manypeopleand businesses across awide
swathofNewYorkandNewJerseywerewithoutpowerforovertwoweeks.
There were 150 data centers in New York and New Jerseyin Sandy’s path. Flooding was catastrophic to
afew. Manydatacenters hadlocatedtheir emergencygenerators inthebasements of their datacenters.
If their emergencygenerators wereonhigher floors, oftentheir fuel tanks andfuelpumps were located in
thebasement.As water pouredintothebasements andprimarypower was lost,thesedatacenters could
notbringuptheiremergencypower;andtheyshutdown.
Even in many cases in which emergency power kicked in, there was no additional fuel for emergency
generators when they ran out of fuel after several days. Gas stations could not pump fuel because they
hadnopower.Whatfuelwasavailablewasdeliveredtoprioritycustomerssuchashospitals.
The Chance of Flooding is Increasing
A study by the U.S. National Academy of Sciences determined that the mean sea level has been rising
steadily over the last century. The study’s results were released in a report entitled “Multimillennial Sea-
levelCommitmentofGlobalWarming.”
The report concluded that mean sea levels will continue to rise unless the increase in the global mean
temperaturetrendisreversed.Withinacentury,morethan1,000citieswillbeallorpartiallyunderwater.
In the U.S., Florida and Louisiana will be especially affected. It is expected that 150 towns in Florida and
114townsinLouisianawillbethreatened.
The higher sea levels will increase coastal flooding. Many data centers are located in these areas and
maybeaffected.
FEMA Flood Zones
Flood zones are geographic areas that FEMA has defined according to varying levels of flood risk and
typeofflooding.Itcategorizesfloodzonesintotwocategories:
 A100-yearfloodzone(theprobabilityofafloodinanygivenyearis1%).
 A500-yearfloodzone(theprobabilityofafloodinanygivenyearis0.2%).
A100-yearfloodzoneisamoderateriskarea.A500-yearfloodzoneisaminimalriskarea.
Protecting Your IT Services
If flooding is even a remote possibilityfor your data center, there are several factors that you should take
intoconsideration:
 If you have the option of relocating your data center or of building a backup data center, do not
locate it in a FEMA flood zone. Furthermore, just being high is not sufficient. If the chosen
2
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

location can be surrounded by water, even if it is not flooded, you may not be able to get fuel
suppliesorpeopletoyourdatacenterintheeventofaflood.
 Plan the location of not only your servers, storage arrays, and network equipment to be out of a
flood’s way,butalsoalloftheancillaryequipmentthatkeepsadatacenterrunning.Thisincludes
emergency generators, UPS systems, fuel tanks, fuel pumps, and cooling equipment. Do not
placetheminabasementorevenonthefirstfloorofyourdatacenter,asfirstfloorsfloodaswell.
 Make sure that fuel tanks are topped off, generators can start, and power can be safelyswitched
fromutilitypowertobackuppower.
 Is a one-hundred mile separation of production and backup facilities sufficient when Sandy’s
hurricane winds stretched 1,100 miles from its center? Cities as far away from New York as
Chicagowereaffected.
 Provide onsite living facilities for critical staff who may not be able to travel. This includes local
hotel rooms if available, cots, nonperishable food, water, and other emergency supplies. Several
days(orevenweeks)shouldbeaccommodated.
 Customers should be offered redundant hosting on a backup site a safe distance away (facilities
such as Amazon’s Availability Zones, which are in fact collocated, may not be sufficient in a
disasterofgreatmagnitude).
 Buybackupmobilegeneratorsandstoretheminasafedistantlocation.
 Negotiate long-term fuel delivery contracts with at least two independent fuel suppliers. If one of
these suppliers needs a bridge or tunnel to cross a river, make sure that the other fuel supplier
doesnot.
Summary
Flooding is probably the data center disaster that is furthest from your mind. However, if there is even a
slight chance that your data center could suffer the consequences of a flood, now is the time to consider
how to avoid such a catastrophe or how you would recover should your data center be taken down by
flooding.
Acknowledgements
Materialforthisarticlewastakenfromthefollowingsources:
VodafoneTurkey’sfloodednetworkbroughtbacktolifeinjustoneday,Nokia;September9,2009.
HurricaneSandy,AvailabilityDigest;December2012.
What Is a Flood Zone, and What Should I Look for When Evaluating Data Centers?, Telx blog; February
27,2014.
Underwater: Data Centers Nationwide Must Prepare for Flooding, Government Technology; August 28,
2014.
ChristmasFloodsTakeOutVodafoneDataCentreinLeeds, TechWeekEurope; January4,2016.
SeverefloodsinLeedshitVodafonedatacentre,CBR;January4,2016.
VodafoneUKdatacentersuffersoutageduetofloods,DatacenterDynamics;January5,2016.
FloodZones,FEMA(FederalEmergencyManagementAgency)
3
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com