– Our September Twitter Feed of Outages
September 2017
A challenge every issue for the Availability Digest is to determine which of the many
availability topics out there win coveted status as Digest articles. We always regret not
focusing our attention on the topics we bypass. With our new Twitter presence, we don’t
have to feel guilty. This article highlights some of the tweets that made headlines in
recent days.
A rodent’s revenge: rats chew through the optical fibre in South London
Apparently unspecified ‘rodents’ nibbled their way through a communications cable in South
London in August, plunging UK provider TalkTalk and others into what’s been described as a
major outage. It appears that the entire cable (presumably containing multiple fibres) had been
gnawed through and broken.
https://t.co/eEUjs0eCwE
Eclipse sidelight: As moon obscures sun, natural gas is backup power.
During the solar eclipse on Aug. 21, operators of giant solar fields from California to the Carolinas
relied on power from fast-start natural gas generators as well as hydroelectric plants and other
sources to fill the gaps as the sky darkens. The celestial event, the first total solar eclipse visible in
the lower 48 states since 1979, provided owners of gas turbines a chance to shine even as the fossil
fuel is expected to be displaced over time by solar and wind energy.
https://t.co/TEkNlzUSOH
Why We Need More Microgrids for Resilience but Aren’t Getting Them
The “vulnerable” U.S. electric grid needs more microgrids for resilience; but outdated rules may get
in the way, according to a new report by the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and
Medicine. The congressionally-mandated report listed microgrids and other distributed energy
resources (DERs) as among 12 fixes to bolster a grid that remains susceptible to “large-area,
prolonged outages that could cost billions of dollars and cause loss of life.”
https://t.co/MplNnjrX4k
1
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

The Mars Colony of the Future Could Be Powered by This Advanced Microgrid
SpaceX and Tesla CEO Elon Musk wants to put a million people on Mars in the next century. They'll
be ferried to the Red Planet on a fleet of spaceships that can each carry 100 or more people and will
make their living in an environment bereft of oxygen and full of danger. While you can't breathe the
air on Mars, with some creative thinking you could bring in many of the comforts of home. Mars has
great potential for energy generation. While its atmosphere is dusty, the sun's light reaches down to
the surface, allowing for solar panels. And the wind that provides the driving force of erosion on Mars
could be harnessed for wind farms. The industrial manufacturing giant Siemens is trying to plan for
this reality. "Mars will be the ultimate microgrid," the company says on its website. "With no
centralized power sources, communities will one day rely on decentralized energy systems."
https://t.co/e5XteuNUai
Can Blockchain secure industrial processes?
The large industrial firms who suffered so badly after the Petya attack could have benefited from
having a fully blockchain enabled system - this is due to the security-by-design that underpins the
technology. Often described as the ‘distributed ledger,’ blockchains are a means of storing data (and
potentially secure code) via a peer-to-peer network of computers. As there is no central server
storing data (which can act as a target for cyberattack), the data is copied identically across each
‘node’ in the network, meaning that if one computer is compromised, it does not result in a business-
critical failure. Changes to any information has to be accepted by the majority of other computers
across the network (called ‘consensus’) before information can be updated on the blockchain. This is
the backbone of the security of a ‘distributed computer’, peer-to-peer, ledger based system.
https://t.co/FDcT04P2KX
Local governments modernize their antiquated equipment to reduce downtime
No city or county ever wants to suffer downtime. To ensure high availability, some governments
modernize antiquated equipment. State-of-the-art technology, such as converged or
hyperconverged infrastructure, takes advantage of virtualization and offers high redundancy. Local
governments also find success through a broad set of strategies and technology to bolster uptime.
https://t.co/6uNVR9ztLM
The 10 Biggest Cloud Outages of 2017 (So Far)
The bigger the cloud provider, the higher the standard they're held to for reporting and remediation.
Whether the outage was caused by a technical glitch, human error or malicious attack, customers
want an honest assessment and explanation of the remedies put in place to ensure it won't happen
again. Here are 10 of the outages so far this year that sparked such discussions.
https://t.co/9G6xjaSgsM
The stock market has about 12 mini flash crashes a day — and we can’t prevent them
Blink. About 300 milliseconds just passed, the same time required for a lightning bolt to travel
100,000 feet, a satellite to fly 2 miles or a stock price to swing from $10 to $0.0001 and back.
Indeed, that actually happened to the shares of the software company Qualys a few years ago.
Similar mini flash crashes involving substantial, instantaneous price moves take place about 12
times a day.
https://t.co/TztxyMbqA9
2
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Failover strategies for the modern enterprise
In today’s increasingly distributed enterprise, connectivity is key. Even short periods of network
downtime can have an immediate impact on revenue and can leave a company exposed to a range
of compliance, regulatory and security risks. While there are a number of options available to help
solve this problem, wireless failover solutions offer the best balance of efficiency and effectiveness
for modern enterprises. Increasingly, businesses are harnessing the benefits of 4G LTE networks
for permanent primary connectivity. These businesses are optimising and pooling data usage among
multiple distributed locations, deploying their networks faster than the competition, and have the
ability to manage their networks remotely with minimal IT support.
https://t.co/ZuxkCgDLGR
Why IT projects still fail
In the age of agile development, devops and related management techniques, is IT project failure
even a thing anymore? The answer, sadly, is yes. In the past, IT failures often meant high-priced
flops, with large-scale software implementations going on way too long and way over budget. Those
failures can and still do happen. Case in point: IBM’s never-completed $110 million upgrade to the
State of Pennsylvania’s unemployment compensation system. But IT failure today is frequently
different than in it was in the past, as agile, devops, continuous delivery and the fail-fast movement
have changed the nature of how IT handles projects. But the fact of the matter is that IT projects still
fail, just in new and sometimes more insidious ways.
https://t.co/u5kb7YxmHi
Will predictive AI finally solve the multi-billion-dollar downtime problem?
Downtime for today’s large, complex businesses means more than a simple inconvenience. The cost
of interruptions, especially when workers are prevented from completing tasks due to out-of-service
infrastructure, can be huge. A Gartner study called “The Cost of Downtime” suggests that a large
company may actually lose as much as $540,000 per hour from a preventable technical failure. The
problem is that without a holistic assessment of equipment wear and reliability, scheduled
maintenance may be out of whack with reality. Service companies are now increasingly looking to
adopt predictive analytics to eliminate time wasted and maximize profits attained. Not surprisingly, a
new generation of predictive analytics companies are tackling this multi-billion-dollar problem.
https://t.co/fPxYYsaEx9
NSE technical glitch shows switchover to back-up site isn't easy
A technical glitch faced by the National Stock Exchange (NSE) on Monday and data breach at banks
earlier this year have raised queries on the ability of the financial sector to quickly respond to and
resolve major cyber security incidents.
https://t.co/1k8tyykxYv
3
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Marketo suffers major outage after domain renewal fail
Marketing automation service provider Marketo has apologised after it failed to renew its main
website domain, leading to a large-scale outage. CEO Steve Lucas “profusely apologised” for the
mishap on Twitter, and it was partially resolved when a customer spotted the unregistered
domain and renewed it before someone else could. The domain had been set up for automatic
renewal, but the process somehow failed. Lucas said the company had so far “identified process
errors with auto renewals as well as human errors” in the initial post-mortem.
https://t.co/9QQlZ2Nm2P
Why online retailers should be scrambling now to avoid Black Friday outages
While most consumers are taking their summertime vacations, retail giants are mobilizing to beef up
their online infrastructure and stress test their systems to handle the surge of holiday shoppers at the
end of the year – which can generate more than 30% of their yearly sales. To keep retailers’
applications running smoothly, IT and Ops teams should follow a checklist to help them hit their
targets throughout the year so they are ready for extreme scalability and continuous IT operations
when the big shopping days hit. Here is what IT and Ops teams should have already checked off
their list this year.
https://t.co/OQSav6b2ZV
GitHub goes down — and takes developer productivity with it
GitHub, the service that is still pretty much the de facto standard for managing source code,
suffered from a major outage on July 31st. Sometime around 9:30am PT, users started to
experience issues with the service and weren’t able to check in new code and make pull requests.
While the company first considered this to be a minor outage, it quickly upgraded the status to
“major service outage.” Back in 2015, GitHub was the victim of a major DDoS attack that plagued
the service for a couple of days. A similar attack also took the service down back in 2012.
https://t.co/G14lcnZzDR
The Importance of Failover Testing
Once we have thoroughly tested an application in service, we would like to make it highly available.
This is typically accomplished by providing a backup copy of the application. Should the production
application fail, the plan is to move all processing to the backup application. A good plan, but will it
work? The only way to be sure is to test a real-life failover. Will the backup take over? Will it do it
quickly, or will it take minutes or even hours to assume processing? Or will the failover fail? We can
only determine this by testing the failover capabilities of our system. But sadly, failover testing is
hardly ever done or is only done partially.
https://t.co/mP81q7Gf4W
From the July Availability Digest: "How HPE is Making Blockchain Resilient"
Blockchain. Oh, no! Another new technology about which I know nothing. That statement
summarized my feelings about blockchain until I heard a presentation from HPE’s Matt Riesz at the
May 2017 NYTUG meeting in Berkley Heights, New Jersey (USA). Matt is a superb speaker. His
clear, concise explanation of how blockchain works elevated my understanding from total ignorance
to a “not nearly as dumb as I thought I was” level. This article is based on Matt’s presentation.
https://t.co/SO5iPvzhVi
4
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Thousands evacuate North Carolina's Outer Banks after power outage caused by
construction
At the end of July, thousands of tourists had to evacuate two islands along the hugely popular Outer
Banks in North Carolina after a construction company caused a massive power outage. The Cape
Hatteras Electric Cooperative said that PCL Construction told the cooperative it had accidentally
driven a steel casing into an underground electric transmission cable while working on the new
Bonner Bridge on North Carolina's coast.
https://t.co/jgheaXBicf
EINSTEIN’S LITTLE-KNOWN PASSION PROJECT? A REFRIGERATOR
Many people know that work on nuclear weapons enabled the development of the first electronic
computers. But it’s no less true that the humble refrigerator, in a roundabout way, enabled the
development of the first atom bomb. While reading the newspaper one morning in 1926, Albert
Einstein nearly choked on his eggs. An entire family in Berlin, including several children, had
suffocated a few nights before when a seal on their refrigerator broke and toxic gas flooded their
apartment. Anguished, the forty-seven-year-old physicist called up a young friend of his, the inventor
and scientist Leo Szilard. “There must be a better way,” Einstein pleaded.
https://t.co/7P29xcqZh8
Adobe Flash Will Be Dead in 3 Years, and It's About Time
Adobe is finally killing off its Flash plugin. The death of Flash has been a long time coming, and the
full migration to HTML5 will likely result in more secure experiences and longer battery life. Just last
April, Adobe had to issue a security update to Flash to address a critical vulnerability that left users
susceptible to ransomware.
https://t.co/z7T5sTPf1F
More than Back-up Power: The Genius of the Healthcare Microgrid
During the Northeast blackout of 2003, half of New York City’s 58 hospitals suffered failures in their
back-up power generators. When hospital back-up power fails, as happened again in some
Northeast hospitals in 2012 during Superstorm Sandy, patients must be evacuated to other facilities,
creating a chain-of-care nightmare for the patients, their families and caregivers at all facilities. That
is why it’s important for healthcare professionals and community leaders to think holistically about
their power supply. Installing a microgrid at the main hospital may not be enough to ensure stable
patient care in a crisis. Communities need to look at their entire healthcare chain.
https://t.co/kBUVS62ue4
Causes of downtime
We have spent years analyzing and classifying the causes of downtime in data centers, but the
subject is now a burning issue. The recent case of British Airways, with 75,000 passengers affected
and more than £100 million in direct losses, joins a number of other events in recent months which
present a surprising panorama.
https://t.co/gIa6B7bWoO
5
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Russian hackers hit Ireland's power grid in another cyberattack on UK's critical
infrastructure
Kremlin-based hackers reportedly targeted Ireland's power grid in another cyberattack on UK's
critical infrastructure. Security experts believe that the Russian hackers intended to
compromise control systems and targeted senior engineers of Ireland's Electricity Supply Board
(ESB) with phishing emails. Experts also said that Ireland, which is home to the European
headquarters of major American tech giants such as Facebook, Apple and others, is being used as a
testing ground by Russian hackers.
https://t.co/odyUnPwjbm
Here's what happens inside Amazon when one of its AWS hosting services goes down
In late February 2017, a number of large websites across the Internet abruptly went down. The
outage lasted several hours — and Amazon's S3 hosting service was to blame. This is because all
the affected sites made use of Amazon Web Services (AWS). The S3 outage highlighted the unique
vulnerabilities of our digital world: a handful of companies are responsible for maintaining huge
swathes of the Internet — and when there's a problem with one of them, thousands of businesses
and millions of people can be left unable to work. So what happens inside Amazon when there's a
tech failure of this magnitude?
https://t.co/VwQlnStOin
