911 Systems Experiencing Unacceptable Availability
March2014
Around the world, we depend upon emergency numbers for critical police, fire, and medical
support. Virtually every country has one or more emergency numbers. In the United States,
Canada, Mexico, and many Latin American countries, the emergency number is 911. In
Europe,Russia,Ukraine,andothercountries,theemergencynumberis112.InAfghanistan,youdial119
for police or fire emergencies or 102 for medical aid. Most GSM mobile phones will automaticallydial the
localemergencynumber.
Emergency calls are answered by telephone operators or dispatchers. If a call is answered by a
telephone operator, the operator will determine the appropriate dispatcher to which to route the call. It is
thedispatcher’sresponsibilityforgettingtheappropriateemergencyservicestothesite.
Whenadispatcher receives acall,heor shemustbeprovided withall
of the emergencyinformation and the location of the nearest available
emergency vehicles so that appropriate dispatch instructions can be
issued. Most emergency call systems (certainly the larger ones) are
dependent upon computer-aided dispatch (CAD) systems. These can
be large server farms (or virtualized farms) providing multiple
applications, such as computer-based telephony, computerized radio
control, automatic number verification, location mapping, automatic
emergencyvehiclelocation,andreal-timeaccess todispatchlogs and
police,fire,rescue,motor-vehicle,andcourtrecords.
StratusTechnolgies
If any one of these applications should fail, the dispatching of emergency services can be severely
hampered, with potential loss of life or property. It is imperative that all emergency call centers be
configured for the maximum availabilityof their computer services. Unfortunately, there is much evidence
that this criterion is not being met, and often not being met by a large margin. We look at some of that
evidenceinthisarticle.
911 Services
In the United States, Canada, and Mexico, the emergency number is 911. The first 911 system went into
operation in the United States in 1968. Since then, the term “911” has become synonymous with public
safety. The formal name for an emergency call center like the U.S. 911 centers is Public Safety
Answering Point (PSAP). There are currently over 6,000 PSAPs in the United States, handling an
estimated240million911callsperyear.
A classic case of 911 failures occurred when New York City upgraded its 911 system in mid-2013.1 It
upgraded its 40-year old green-screen mainframe CAD system with a new, web-based system that was
1NewYorkCity’sNew911SystemGoesDownFourTimes,AvailabilityDigest;June2013.
1
©2014SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

being used by2,500 other emergencycallcenters around the world.Thesystem was exhaustivelytested
forsixmonthsbeforebeingputintoserviceattheendofMay,2013.
Even with all of the testing, the system failed on the first day, and then failed again … and again … and
again. It failed four times in three days, often for up to a half hour. During this time, operators taking
emergencycalls had to writethe emergencydetails ontoslips of paper andgivethem torunners whoran
withtheslipstothedispatchers.Thisisnotthekindof911operationsweexpect.
Next-Generation 911 Services
The current 911 services are based on telephone communications. The receiving operator or dispatcher
obtains the details of the emergency from the caller and arranges for emergency services to be
dispatched. If the call is from a land line, the address of the caller is generallyknown. If the call is from a
mobile phone, typically only the approximate location is known; and the actual address must be obtained
fromthecaller.
However, with the advent of smart phones, much more information is now available. Callers can
communicate via text. They can take still photos and videos showing more detail of the emergency. It is
estimatedthatcurrentlyover one-third of 911calls originatefrom wireless devices,and the expectation is
thatthispercentagewillcontinuetogrow.
The next generation of CAD systems, dubbed NG911, will allow CAD systems to receive, capture, and
route digital communications such as photos and text messages received from virtually any
communications device to dispatchers and emergency responders. For instance, a caller could take a
pictureofatankercarryinghazardousmaterialthatisinvolvedinanaccident.Thephotocouldberelayed
to dispatchers so that they know in advance the type of hazardous material they will be dealing with and
candispatchtheappropriateemergencyequipmenttothesite.
NG911 systems are necessarily going to be more complex and fault-prone that today’s systems.
Configuringforavailabilitywillbeevenmoreimportant.
Stratus Technologies’ Public Safety PSAP Survey
Stratus Technologies has just published its second annual survey of PSAP’s, the 2013 Public Safety
PSAP Survey Results.2 It received responses from over 900 North American PSAP professionals on
topicsrangingfrom populationcovered,callvolume,staffing,andNG911migrationtostatisticsonsystem
availability.ItsfindingsonPSAPavailabilitywereappalling.
DisasterPreparedness
Even though there is a nationwide focus on PSAP availability, the survey found that 20% of all PSAP’s
hadnodisaster backupsite for their CAD systems.Thismeans thatadisaster couldtakedowntheentire
911 service. This is exactly the time when a 911 service is most critical. During a severe earthquake,
flood, or storm (such as Superstorm Sandy), people in distress would not be able to call for emergency
help.
Even more disconcerting was that almost 20% of PSAP’s did not even have a disaster recovery plan. If
oneoftheseareaslostitsPSAP,therewasnoplanforalternativeemergencycommunications.
DaveLeClair,SeniorDirectoryofStrategyatStratusTechnologies,statedinaninterviewthat:
“Thefactthat20percentofPSAPsdonothaveaphysicalbackupPSAPlocationincaseofnatural
disasterorcatastrophicoutagemadesensepossiblyduetothecostofmaintainingbackuplocations.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0806/nyc_911.pdf
2http://www.stratus.com/~/media/Stratus/Files/Library/WhitePapers/WP-PSAP-Survey-Results.pdf
2
©2014SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

However,thefactthatoneoutofeveryfivePSAPsdoesnothaveacontingencyplaninplacewas
alarming.We’replanningafollow-upquestionforthenextsurvey.We’dliketoknowwhytheydon’t
haveaplaninplace.Budget?Lackofexpertise?”
OutageExperience
The survey found that 70% of PSAP’s had experienced at least one outage in the last twelve months.
Almosthalfhadtwoormoreoutages.Sixteenpercenthadfiveormoreoutages.Sevenpercenthadmore
thantenoutages.OutagesseemtobeafactoflifeforPSAP’s.
73% of the smallest PSAP’s (serving a population under 20,000) experienced outages, while 65% of the
largest PSAPs (serving a population over 200,000) suffered outages. This indicates that the frequency of
outagesseemstoberelativelyindependentofthesizeofaPSAP.
Only11%ofoutageswererecoveredrapidly(underoneminute).58%ofalloutageslastedformorethan
fifteenminutes,and28%lastedformorethananhour.Theaveragenumberofmissedcallsasafunction
ofcallvolumeandoutagedurationisshowninthefollowingtable:
Numberof911CallsPerYear
10,000 25,000 50,000 100,000 250,000 500,000
1minute 0 0 0-1 0-1 0-1 1
15minutes 0-1 1 2 3 7 14
30minutes 1 2 3 6 14 29
1hour 2 3 6 12 29 57
Hourlyoutages were worst for PSAPs handling large call volumes. 34% of PSAPs with call volumes over
100,000callsper yearhadoutagesexceedingonehour.ForaPSAPthathandles500,000callsper year,
aone-hour outagemeans thatan average of 57calls maybemissed.Howmanylives is this?Howmany
destroyedbuildingsisthis?
TheMovementtoManagedServices
ManyPSAPsaremovingtointegratedenvironmentsthatprovidemanagementoflargeserverfarms.One
suchmoveistovirtualization.
32% of all PSAPs are now operating their CAD systems in a virtualized environment, and 19% are
planning to virtualize. 49% of PSAPs are not planning to move to virtualization. However, the survey
shows that 53% of PSAPs that are running virtualized environments experienced one or more outages
lastyearexceeding15minutes.Clearly,virtualizationisnotasolutiontohighavailability.
15% of PSAPs are currently running in a cloud, and 13% plan to do so. But based on current cloud
availability of three 9s (8 hours of downtime per year), the cloud is not likely to prove to be a solution to
thePSAPavailabilityproblemeither.
High Availability Options
Looking at different approaches to availability inevitably leads us to a discussion of “9s.” If an application
isup99.9%ofthetime,wesaythatithasanavailabilityofthree9s.
The number of 9s is directlyrelated to the amount of time that a system is down. If a system is up 99.9%
of the time, it is down 0.1% of the time. Since there are 8,760 hours in a year (excluding leap years),
three 9s means that the system will be down 8.76 hours per year. The relation of 9s to downtime is as
follows:
3
©2014SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Nines Uptime Averagedowntimeperyear
2 (99%) 87h36m
3 (99.9%) 8h46m
4 (99.99%) 53m
5 (99.999%) 5m
6 (99.9999%) 0.5m
A proper value for PSAP availability should be at least five 9s (down five minutes per year). If we look at
variousapproachestoPSAPconfigurations,fieldexperiencehasshownthefollowingavailabilities:
Conventionalunmanagedcommodityservers 99%(down87.5hours/year)
Hardenedservers(someredundancy) 99.9%(down8.8hours/year)
Clusters 99.95%(down4.5hours/year)
Virtualization 99.95%(down4.5hours/year)
Clouds 99.9%(down8.8hours/year)
None of these solutions achieve the desired availability of five 9s or better. This gets us into the realm of
fault-tolerant systems. There are two types of fault-tolerant systems – software fault tolerance and
hardwarefaulttolerance.Thesearesystemsthatprovidetwoprocessingsystems,withonesystem ready
to take over or with both systems active in the processing. The only wayfor a fault-tolerant system to fail
is for both systems to fail simultaneously (more likely, the second system fails after the first system has
failed but before it has been recovered). Thus, their availabilities are very high. Typical availabilities for
fault-tolerantsystemsare:
Softwarefaulttolerance 99.995%(down26minutes/year)
Hardwarefaulttolerance 99.999%(down5minutes/year)
With software fault tolerance, two systems are provided. Each is fully configured to run the application,
but only one is actively in production. The other system is an active standby, ready to take over on a
moment’s notice. Its database is kept in synchronism with the production system via real-time data
replication. Should the production system fail, all activity is rerouted to the standby system, which can
resume processing rapidly. Software fault-tolerant systems have an availability of 99.995% (almost five
nines),exhibitingayearlydowntimeofabout26minutes.
Hardwarefault-tolerantsystemsemploytwosystemsthatareactivelyprocessingallactivity.Ifoneshould
fail, the other system continues processing. Field experience has shown that hardware fault-tolerant
systemshaveavailabilitiesexceedingfive9s.
Anexampleof acommerciallyavailablesoftwarefault-tolerantsystem is everRun Enterprisefrom Stratus
Technologies, with an availability of 99.995% (down 26 minutes/year). Stratus’ ftServers are hardware
fault-tolerant systems with continuing field measurements showing availabilities in the order of 99.9997%
-almostsixnines(1.5minutesofdowntimeperyear).
Another optionfor larger systems is HPNonStopsystems.Thesesystems employamix of hardwareand
softwarefaulttoleranceandachievefive9sofavailability(5minutesofdowntimeperyear).
Whatisthevalueoflife?Isitworththeinvestmentinfault-tolerantsystems?Thisisacriticaldecisionthat
eachtown,city,county,orstatemustmake.
Summary
The reliability of today’s emergency call systems is far from what it should be. Statistics show that the
availability of these systems is, at best, dismal. Classic approaches to high availability such as clusters
miss the mark by a wide margin, as do virtualized systems and cloud deployments. All of these
approachesresultinhoursofdowntimeperyear,duringwhichlifeandpropertyareatgreatdanger.
4
©2014SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Fault-tolerant systems are commercially available that reduce downtimes to just a few minutes per year.
Arethelivessavedworththisinvestment?
5
©2014SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com