Banks Use Synchronous Replication for Zero RPO
February2010
Two banks, the Bank of New York and the Fifth Third Bank, have each built highly-resilient,
triplexed data center complexes that use a mix of asynchronous and synchronous replication. By
doing so, the banks have achieved zero data loss and a recovery time of only two to four hours
followinganydisastrousfailureoftheirproductiondatacenters.
The Problem
Real-timebankingservicesarefundamentaltocommercetoday.Ifconsumerscannotaccessand
managetheir cash,andif businesses cannotmovefunds betweentheir ownaccounts or thoseof
their vendors and customers, commerce comes to a halt. For this reason, many banks maintain
disaster-recoverydatacenters thatcan be put intooperation should their productiondata centers
be put out of commission by some disastrous event. To make it unlikely that any single disaster
will take out both the production and the disaster-recovery data centers, disaster-recovery sites
shouldbelocatedfarfromtheproductionsites(typicallybyafewhundredmiles).
Equallyimportantis thedataupon whichthebanking applications depend.Transactions lostdue
toaproduction-sitefailure canwreak havoc onthebank’s customers.Therefore,itis importantto
beabletorecoverallcompletedtransactionsfollowingaproduction-siteoutage.Thisimpliesreal-
time synchronization of data between the production site
recovery
and the backup site so that no transaction completes on
the production site before it has been safe-stored at the data
base
backup site. To prevent performance deterioration caused
bytheapplicationhavingtowaitforthebackupsitetostore
the data, the production and data sites must be located
closetoeachother.
resync
This presents a conundrum of sorts. The sites have to be asynchronous
farapart,andtheyhavetobeclosetogether. replication
bunker
The Bank of New York and Fifth Third Bank have solved
data
this problem by combining asynchronous replication to a base
remote disaster-recovery site with synchronous replication
to a third nearby “data bunker” site. Asynchronous production synchronous
replication1 to the recovery site may lose some data if the data replication
production site fails, but synchronous replication2 to the base
bunker site guarantees that all data is preserved. On the
other hand, the bunker site may be taken out with the
TriplexedDataCenters
1AsynchronousReplicationEngines,AvailabilityDigest;November2006.
2SynchronousReplication,AvailabilityDigest;December2006.
1
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

production site (hopefully not) due to a common disaster; but in this extreme case, the recovery
siteisstillavailabletotakeover.
The Bank of New York
TheBankofNewYorkistheoldestbankintheU.S.,havingbeenfoundedin1784.Itwasthefirst
corporate stock to be traded on the New York Stock Exchange. The Bank operates in 33
countries and is one of the largest security clearing agents in the U.S. It clears 50% of all U.S.
governmentsecurities.
TheBank’sData-CenterProblem
As it entered the 21st century, the Bank maintained several data centers. The production and
disaster-recovery sites were in close proximity. The production sites were in lower Manhattan,
andthedisaster-recoverysiteswereelsewhereinNewYorkCity.
The 9/11 disaster changed all that. The Bank realized that it had to move its IT operations to a
lessrisk-pronearea.Furthermore,ithadtoseparateits productionanddisaster-recoveryfacilities
by a large distance to be immune to a widespread disaster. But it had to do this in such a way
thatitwouldlosenodataintheeventofaproductiondata-centerdisaster.
TheSolution–TripleDataCenters
As a consequence, the Bank decided that it would consolidate its multiple data centers into a
single production data center with remote protection.3 Unlike the common practice of other
companies, the Bank did not attempt to locate its IT facilities near its headquarter operations.
Rather,afteranextensivesearch,itchosearemoteareawithalowerrisk profileseveralhundred
miles from New York Cityto locate its production data center. It chose a disaster-recoverysite in
anotherstatewithanequipmentconfigurationthatwasanexactmirroroftheproductionfacility.
The Bank planned to keep the backup data-center’s databases in synchronism with the
production data center via asynchronous replication. But this meant that some data, up to 60
seconds by the Bank’s estimate, might be lost should the production center suffer an outage. To
correct this, the Bank planned a third data center near the production site. The third data center
would use synchronous replication to keep its database synchronized with that of the production
site.
Therefore, should the production site fail, the nearby data center would contain all transactions
that were executed up to the time of the outage. No data would be lost. This data center was to
behardenedsothatitcouldsurvivetheeffectsofadisasterthattook downtheproductionsite.In
effect,itwasadatabunker.
Thedatabunkerwastobelinkedtoboththeproductionsiteandthebackupsite.Intheeventofa
production-site outage, the backup site would quickly bring its database up-to-date by
establishing a session with the data bunker and downloading only the data changes that it had
missed.Oncethis wasaccomplished,thebackupsitewouldbeputintoproductionwithzerodata
loss.
Construction of the backup data center began in 2002 while normal operations continued. It was
constructed with excess space and populated with excess server capacity to provide scalability
for the Bank’s rapid growth. Once it was completed in 2004, it became the backup site for the
existingproductiondatacenters.
3 The Bank of New York: TPC Data Center Consolidation Project, The Computerworld Honors Program Case Study;
2006.
2
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Thenewconsolidated production datacenter cameonlineattheendof 2005 with acontingentof
equipment identical to that of the new disaster-recovery data center. Five petabytes of data were
migrated to it. Once this was complete, and after exhaustive testing by key customers and
business partners, consolidation of the Bank’s three original data centers into the new production
center was accomplished in ninety days. The initiation of asynchronous replication to the backup
site and synchronous replication to the data bunker completed the move. At no point during the
movewascustomerserviceimpacted.
Networking
To achieve the desired reliabilityof IT operations, the network interconnecting the sites had to be
as resilient as the multiple data-center configuration. The Bank worked closely with several
communication carriers to ensure carrier diversity and route diversity so that there would be no
single point of failure in the network. An extensive broadband wide-area network backbone was
established. If the Bank had been a telecommunications carrier, it would have been the ninth
largestintheU.S.
OperatingtheNewDataCenterComplex
To maintain continuity of operations in the event of an outage, the Bank set up identical help
desks and virtual command centers at both the production and backup sites and moved its
experienced personnel to thesesites.Sufficientadditionalpersonnel were hired sothat theentire
bankingoperationcanbehandledfromeithersite.
Though either site can handle 100% of the help-desk load, customer service is split 50/50
between the two sites during normal operations. The entire operations of the data center can be
managed equally well from either site. Therefore, should there be a disastrous event of some
sort, no personnel have to be moved, a feat that might not otherwise be possible under some
conditions following a regional disaster. Uninterrupted customer service can be provided around
theclock.
Data-ReplicationTechnology
The Bank chose EMC storage systems and replication software to implement the redundant data
network needed to execute its contingency plans. Multiple EMC Symmetrix DMX high-
performance storage systems, each capable of managing about one petabyte of data, were
installedineachdatacenter.
Synchronization of the diverse databases is accomplished via EMC’s Symmetrix Remote Data
Facility (SRDF), a software-based data-replication engine that runs on the Symmetrix storage
systems. The SRDF/Star option provides asynchronous replication to the disaster-recovery data
center and synchronous replication to the data-center bunker from the same source volumes. It
facilitatesrapidresynchronizationandfailoverintheeventofasource-systemfailure.
TheResult
The triply-redundant data-center configuration implemented by the Bank of New York4 meets an
RPO specification(recoverypointobjective) of zerodataloss andanRTO specification(recovery
time objective) of two to four hours. This compares to several hours of lost data and a recovery
timeofsixteentotwentyhourswiththeoldtapebackupmethod.
4TheBankofNewYorkisnowTheBankofNewYorkMellonfollowingits2007mergerwithMellonCorporation.
3
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

The new contingency configuration provides resiliency to man-made and natural disasters such
as the 9/11 terrorist attack, Hurricane Katrina, and the 2003 U.S. East Coast blackout. It is fully
compliant with the regulations outlined by the Federal Reserve, the Office of the Currency, and
the SEC (Securities and Exchange Commission) in their white paper “Interagency Paper on
Sound Practices to Strengthen the Resilience of the U.S. Financial System,” which reflects the
lessonslearnedfrom9/11.
Meeting an RPO of zero and an RTO of two to four hours with a geographically-distributed
systemensuresthattheBank’sservicestoitscustomerswillcontinueinthefaceofanydisaster.
Fifth Third Bank
Meanwhile, another bank, Fifth Third Bank, faced the same problems as the Bank of New York.
FifthThirdBank has almost1,200bankingcenters across tenstates andmanages $100 billion in
assets. Handling millions of dollars of banking transactions per day, its business and retail
customersdependupontheaccuracyandavailabilityoftheirbankingdata.
Following the 9/11 terrorist attack, the Bank had to comply with new government mandates for
informationprotectionandrecovery.Consequently,itfeltthatithadtoimprovetheresiliencyofits
IT systems. It also saw an enhanced opportunityto market its services to new customers if it had
a strong resiliency story. Furthermore, if the system were structured properly, testing of new
applications and application modifications could be done with current data rather than weeks-old
staledatabasedonmagnetic-tapebackups.
TheFifthThirdBankSolution
The Bank implemented a comprehensive business-continuity, backup, recovery, and archiving
solution5 similar to that described above for the Bank of New York. It built new production and
disaster-recovery data centers that were 370 miles apart. This gives the Bank protection from a
large disaster that might take out its production data center. The disaster-recovery data center is
keptinsynchronismwiththeproductiondatacenterviaasynchronousreplication.
However, the Bank estimated that it might lose up to 30 seconds of data following a production-
site outage because of the asynchronous-replication solution. To solve this problem, the Bank
constructed a third data center closer to the production center to act as a second up-to-date data
repository.Thethirddatacenteriskeptsynchronizedviathesynchronousreplicationofdatafrom
the production site. This data center is far enough away from the production site to ensure that it
willunlikelybetakenoutbyacommondisaster butcloseenoughsothatapplicationperformance
isnotaffected.
In the Fifth Third Bank’s solution, failover can be either to the nearby site or to the remote
disaster-recoverysite.Thesitechosentobecomethenewproductionsitemaintainssynchronism
with the other site via asynchronous data replication during the outage of the original production
site.
The Bank also chose EMC Symmetrix DMX storage systems. EMC’s SRDF/Star is used to
provide the dual synchronous/asynchronous replication. Being an early adopter of dual
replication, the Bank worked closely with EMC to refine the SRDF product. Enhancements
included more efficient cache configurations, better monitoring and reporting capabilities, and
fullerutilizationoftheavailablebandwidth.
5
Fifth Third Bank: Business continuity, backup, recovery, and archiving, The Computerworld Honors Program Case
Study;2007.
4
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Rapid recovery is only possible if the data is consistent and is synchronized across all
mainframesandopensystems.Toensurethis,theBank usesSRDF’sMulti-SessionConsistency
featuretoensurethatalldatabases aresynchronizedtothesamepointintimeshouldarecovery
benecessary.
TheResult
The Fifth Third Bank’s triplexed data centers give it extreme resiliency in the face of any man-
made or natural disaster. Following an outage of the production data center due to such a
disaster,the Bank willaccountfor allcompleted transactions at the timeof theoutage and will be
abletorecover its services withintwotofour hours.This compares toaprevious recoverytimeof
sixteentotwentyhoursfrommagnetictapeaswellashoursoflosttransactions.
Interestingly, application managers were slow to accept the new system. They were very
comfortable with their existing tape backup procedures upon which theyhad depended for years.
However,withtimeandeducation,thisreluctancehasbeenresolved.
FifthThirdDidn’tStopHere
Fifth Third Bank is a leader in providing its customers with high- and continuous availability of its
services.Inadditiontothe triplexed datacenters described above, it also runs applications on an
active/active NonStop system.6 This system has nodes in Florida and Michigan. The transaction
load is normally split between the two nodes, and their databases are kept synchronized via
asynchronousreplication. Shouldanodefail,recoveryis insecondssinceallthatisrequiredisto
reroute all transactions to the surviving node, which is known to be good since it is currently
processingtransactions.
In fact, the Bank uses this capability to switch all load to the Michigan site when a hurricane
approachesitsFloridafacility.
Summary
The implementation of a triplexed data-center architecture using a mix of asynchronous and
synchronousreplicationisfairlynew.Bychoosingthis route,anenterprisecan“haveitscakeand
eat it,too.” Itcanensurethatno commondisaster will prevent itfrom offeringits IT services toits
customersandpartnerswhileatthesametimeensuringthatnodatawillbelost.
The solutions described above use EMC’s SRDF/Star replication facility. Other products can be
used as well. For instance, HP’s NonStop systems can be configured in this way using remote
mirroring to protect against data loss (what HP calls its Zero Lost Transaction, or ZLT, option). A
third distant disaster-recovery site can then be synchronized via the HP NonStop RDF (Remote
Database Facility) asynchronous replication engine or via several other asynchronous replication
enginesavailablefromthirdpartiessuchGravic,Oracle,andNTI.
It is expected that a new technology called coordinated commits7 will be introduced in the next
year. Coordinated commits provide synchronous replication by asynchronously replicating
changes and synchronizing the target database only at transaction-commit time. This technology
will substantially remove the distance limitation on synchronous replication, allowing zero data
loss and rapid recovery times to be achieved with only two systems. However, even with this
technology,athird nodein theapplicationnetwork is usefultoensurethatthereis nosinglepoint
offailureduringthetimethatonenodeistakendownformaintenanceorupgrades.
6MajorBankUsesActive/ActivetoAvoidHurricanes,AvailabilityDigest;October2007.
7HP’sNonStopSynchronousGateway,AvailabilityDigest;June2009.
5
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com