Are Our Power Grids Vulnerable?
December2013
According to many studies by experts in the field, the American power grid is aging and
vulnerabletocollapse.Thethreatofnaturaldisastersandterroristactivitymakethecollapseofthepower
systemagrowinglikelihood.
The North American power system experienced the granddaddy of all outages in August, 2003, when an
overheated transmission line in Ohio sagged, contacted trees, and failed.1 Its load was transferred to
other overheated lines, which then failed. A software bug in the monitoring system prevented the power
controllers from seeing the failures. Soon, the Ohio power system called on its neighbors in the electric
power grid for power and overwhelmed them to the point of failure. The failures cascaded until the entire
NortheastU.S.andpartsofCanadawerewithoutpowerfortwodays.
Studies show that from 1965 to 1988 – a period of 20+ years – there were three major failures of the
nation’s power grid system. From 1989 to 2009 – a 20 year period – there were 54 such failures. Most of
thesefailureswereweatherrelated.
However, the danger of weather is now being compounded by the danger of cyberattacks. Thousands of
cyberattacks hit the U.S. power grids every day. So far, they have been stopped by firewalls and other
intrusion-prevention systems. However, a pair of researchers has discovered a vulnerability in the power
monitoring and control systems that could be exploited to take down major portions of the power grid in
the U.S. and elsewhere. In addition, a recent exercise called GridEx II demonstrated the damage that
determinedterroristscouldinflectonpowersystems.
The DNP3 Protocol Vulnerability
Thesecurityvulnerabilityhastodowithanoldserialcommunicationsprotocol,DPN3,thatisstillinactive
use in power monitoring and control systems. These systems are called Supervisory Control and Data
Acquisition (SCADA) systems and are in common use to link supervisory personnel in control centers to
remote power generation and transmission facilities and to electric substations that distribute the power.
Via the SCADA systems, controllers can determine the state of everydevice in the field and can execute
controlstomanagethepowerflowandtoworkaroundfailuresbeforearepairmancanbedispatched.
A SCADA system comprises a master station located at the central control facility and Remote Terminal
Units (RTUs) located in the field. The master station periodically polls each of its RTUs to determine
changes in the state of the power system. If it detects a problem – for instance, an increase in power
demand approaching the capability of the power system – it can execute commands to mitigate the
1TheGreat2003NortheastBlackoutandthe$6BillionSoftwareBug,AvailabilityDigest:March,2007.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/private/0203/northeast_blackout.pdf
1
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

problem. For instance, in this case, the master station (either automatically or under manual control)
mightcommandabrownout.
Thecommunicationsystem between the master stationandits RTUs mustbeveryrobustandreliable.In
the earlier days of SCADA systems, telephone lines and microwave transmission systems were used for
communication. One problem was that every vendor had its own protocol, so that a master station
manufacturedbyonevendorcouldnotcommunicatewithRTUsfromanothervendor.
Tosolvethis problem,in1993theDNP3(Distributed Network Protocol) was adoptedbytheindustry.The
protocol was designed to provide reliable communications in the adverse environments to which the
electricutilitysystemsaresubject.TheDNP3protocolisusedbymostofthetopfivepowerutilities.
However, it was not designed to be secure from hackers. Malware was unknown at the time. As this
security problem became recognized, much work was done to add Secure Authentication to the DNP3
protocol.However,theimplementationofthesefeaturesisnot yetverywidespread.Rather,cybersecurity
regulations have focused on IP communication protocols that are being used by newer SCADA systems.
DNP3isgenerallyexcludedfromtheseregulations.
ApairofresearchersrecentlydiscoveredthevulnerabilityintheDNP3protocol.Viathisvulnerability,they
could crash the RTU software that monitors a substation. The controllers in the central control facility
wouldthen be blinded from knowing thestatus of thesubstation. Theresearchers further determined that
an attacker at an unmanned substation could crash other substations, thus causing a widespread power
failure.
To determine the extent of this vulnerability, the researchers tested the DNP3 communication software of
sixteen vendor systems. They were able to break every one. In the case of one vendor, the researchers
foundthattheycouldintroducemalwareintotheRTUfromafar,whichwouldallowtheRTUtobeinfected
withothermalware,suchasStuxnet,whichdisabledIraniancentrifugesin2010.2
The researchers compiled a report about the DNP3 vulnerabilities and submitted it to the Department of
Homeland Security’s (DHS) Industrial Control Systems Cyber Emergency Response Team (ICS-CERT),
whoseresponsibilityitistonotifyvendorsofvulnerabilitiesandtoissuepublicadvisories.
Disappointedly, DHS has been slow to respond. It took ICS-CERT four months to issue advisories, and it
has as yet to issue any mandates. During this time, the researchers have found the vulnerability in nine
additionalvendorsystems.
Some vendors have eliminated the vulnerability. However, many systems with the vulnerability are still in
service.
Though the researchers currently charge for their security test software, they have said that they will
releaseafreeversioninMarch,2014,sothatallvendorscanchecktheirsystemsforthevulnerability.
GridEx II
Meanwhile,thepowerutilityindustryistakingthepossibilityofterrorismcausingmajorpowerfailuresvery
seriously. Recently, it engaged in an industry-wide exercise dubbed GridEx II. A crew of about forty
specialists from the North American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC), operating out of a facility in
Washington, D.C., led the attacks. NERC is the institution that oversees and regulate\s the reliability of
theNorthAmericanelectricalgrids.
NERC injected computer viruses into grid control systems, simulated bombed transformers, and
substations, and knocked out dozens of power lines. DDoS (Distribute Denial of Service) attacks were
2Stuxnet–TheWorld’sFirstCyberweapon,AvailabilityDigest;March2011.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0603/stuxnet.pdf
2
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

alsomadeonseveralcontrolcomputers.Thetestsinvolved210U.S.utilitycompaniesaswellassomein
Mexico and Canada that are part of the U.S. power grid. 10,000 electrical engineers, cybersecurity
specialists, utility executives, and FBI personnel grappled with the unseen enemy for 48 hours and tried
tokeepthepowergridsfunctioning.
Though no actual operating equipment was affected, the simulated result was not good. Control
computers weretearingthe system apart.DHS’s National Cybersecurityand Communications Integration
Center specialists took calls from electric industry technicians all over the country to assist them in
recovering from cyberattacks. Hundreds of major transformers and transmission lines were damaged or
destroyed. Tens of millions of Americans were out of power. The viruses injected into the control
computers kept technicians in the control centers from knowing the status of critical equipment, requiring
the dispatching of several trucks with linemen to investigate. In many cases, attempts by the linemen to
enterpowerfacilitieswerestymiedbypoliceofficerswhohadlockeddownlocationsbecauseofshooters.
Allcommunicationbyemailorphonewasloggedtoassesswhetherparticipantscouldreachotherparties
such as police, cybersecurity centers, and other power companies and provide the appropriate
information. The game controllers purposely injected some “fog of war” confusion into the
communications. In an earlier test two years ago, it was found that communication was good with
neighboring power systems, but it was poor with national organizations. Therefore, it was difficult for
anyone to get an overview of what was happening. It will take several weeks of analysis to determine
whethercommunicationhasimproved.
The purpose of the exercise was to pose problems that were hard to solve and to expose areas that
needed improvement. The drill participants would not disclose the locations that were attacked for
securityreasons.Thechosensiteswerethosethatinsidersthoughtwouldbevulnerable.
Summary
The rate of major power outages is increasing as the U.S. power system has aged. Though weather has
classicallyplayedthemajorroleinpoweroutages,terrorismisbecomingagreaterconcern.TheGridExII
exercisehasdemonstratedthatterroristattacks,bothphysicalandcyber,cantodaycausemajordamage
to the electric grid. This concern is compounded by the discovery of security vulnerabilities such as was
foundintheDNP3protocolininstalledequipment
It is probable that power utilities around the world are subject to these same challenges. It is incumbent
uponallutilitiestogagetheirexposuretoterrorismandtointroduceappropriateprotectivepolicies.
Acknowledgements
Theinformationforthisarticlewastakenfromthefollowingsources:
ElectricalGridisCalledVulnerabletoPowerShutdown,N.Y.Times;October18,2013.
Apocalypse: Threat of massive grid shutdown increasing in face of terrorism, natural disasters, Gazette;
November11,2013.
AttackRavagesPowerGrid.(JustaTest.),N.Y.Times;November14,2013.
3
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com