Prolexic – a DDoS Mitigation Service Provider
April2013
Prolexic (www.prolexic.com) is a firm that focuses solely on mitigating
Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks. Headquartered in
Hollywood, Florida, Prolexic was founded in 2003 and become the first
company to offer cloud-based DDoS mitigation services. Many
companies –ISPs,telcos,ContentDistributionNetworks,DNSserviceproviders,andothers–offerthese
services on their platforms but only as an adjunct to their normal business activities. Prolexic is unique in
thatitsdatacentersarededicatedsolelytoDDoSattackmitigation.
Prolexic has grown rapidly since its founding. Within one year, it had one hundred customers. In 2005, it
was named among the top 100 privately held companies. It has experienced a compound annual growth
rate of 45%. This growth rate is commensurate with the growth in DDoS attacks. In the first quarter of
2012, Prolexic mitigated more attacks then it did in all of 2011. Prolexic claims to mitigate ten to eighty
attacksperday.
Prolexic employs a layered defenseagainstDDoSattacks toblock attack attempts andtokeeplegitimate
traffic flowing. It uses experts to analyze traffic and to identify malicious traffic and its signatures. It
develops defenses against new and changing attack signatures in real time. It provides emergency
bandwidththroughitsscrubbingcenterstoallowacustomertoweatheranattack.
What is a DDoS Attack?
Adenial-of-service(DoS)attackisintendedtobringtheInternet-facingservicesofacompanytoitsknees
by sending so much malicious traffic to it that it does not have the resources to respond to legitimate
traffic.Ineffect,sofarasusersareconcerned,thewebsiteisdown.
In a DoS attack, a single computer attempts to generate sufficient traffic to achieve this goal. However, a
DoSattackbyasinglesystemfacestwoproblems:
 Theattackingsystemisunlikelytobeabletogenerateenoughtraffictoseriouslyaffectitsvictim.
 It is easy to identify the attacking system and to block traffic from it (and perhaps to take felony
actionagainstitunderthelawsofmanycountries).
Enter a Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attack. In a DDoS attack, a botnet of hundreds, thousands,
or more infected PCs (the bots), controlled by one or more command and control servers, generates
millions of messages per second directed at the victim server. This is enough traffic to seriously impact
even the largest of systems. Furthermore, the IP address of the attacker is hidden bythe botnet, and the
IP addresses of the bots can be spoofed so that it is impossible to identify the attackers and block their
traffic.
1
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Botnets have now matured to the point that extremely large botnets are created by volunteers who offer
their PCs for political reasons. Furthermore, botnets of PC systems are being superseded by botnets of
massiveinfectedservers.AservercangenerateathousandtimesasmuchmalicioustrafficasaPC.1
Botnets can now be rented from cybercriminals rather inexpensively. A botnet containing 100,000 bots
canberentedfor$200perday.
An excellent example of a successful DDoS attack is the series of attacks against major U.S. banks in
late 2012 by an Islamic hactivist group incensed at the objectionable YouTube video, “Innocence of
Muslims.” Their attacks, occurring in September and December, disabled the online portals of several
banks for a day or more each. The group vows that it will continue its attacks until the video is removed
fromtheInternet.2
Mitigating a DDoS Attack
Combating a determined DDoS attack is a very difficult proposition. Firewalls and intrusion prevention
appliances can be successful for small attacks measured in the few gigabit-per-second (gbps) range, but
get overwhelmed at higher rates. DDoS attacks that generate 50 to 100 gbps are becoming more
common.In2012,Prolexicmitigatedsevenattacksthatexceeded50gbps.
At these high data rates, the only effective defense for a company is to route its traffic to a DDoS
mitigation network. These are networks of large data centers that can handle the traffic load, scrub the
attackeddatatoremovemalicioustraffic,andreroutethegoodtrafficbacktothecompany.
The Prolexic DDoS Mitigation Strategy
ProlexiccombatsDDoSattacksthroughtwomechanisms:
 It monitors a client’s traffic via its Security Operations Center (SOC). DDoS specialists watch for
traffic patterns that might signal an attack and provide real-time instructions to the client’s IT staff
astowhatstepstotaketothwarttheattack.
 If the attack becomes excessive, the client’s traffic is routed to the Prolexic DDoS mitigation
network for scrubbing so that the client’s systems receive only clean traffic. Prolexic manages
fourlargedatacentersaroundtheworldforscrubbing–oneinLondon,oneinHongKong,onein
California, and one in Virginia. Currently, a scrubbing center can handle 800 gbps of traffic.
However, with the increasing size of DDoS attacks, Prolexic is making ongoing investments in its
scrubbingcenterstoincreasetheircapacitysoastostayaheadofDDoShackers.
TheInternetProtocolLayers
TheInternetprotocolstackcomprisesfourlayers:
 The Application layer provides communications
betweenapplications(suchasFTPandSMTP).
 The Transport layer establishes communications
betweentwohosts(TCP,UDP)
Wikipedia–Internetprotocolsuite
1
AnexcellentresourceforthosenewtoDDoSattacksistheProlexicwhitepaper,TheExecutiveGuidetoDDoS.
2IslamicHactivistsAttackU.S.Banks,AvailabilityDigest;October2012.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0710/bank_attacks.pdf
DDoSAttacksonU.S.BanksContinue,AvailabilityDigest;January2013.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0801/more_bank_attacks.pdf
2
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

 TheInternetlayerforwardsdatagramsfromonenetworktoanother(IP).
 TheNetworklayerimplementsthelocalnetwork(Ethernet,FibreChannel).
DDoS attacks are made against the Application, Transport, and Internet layers. Application layer attacks
(Level 7 attacks) attempt to overwhelm a host’s processing capacity by invoking application functions on
a massive scale. Transport layer and Internet Layer attacks (Level 4 and Level 3 attacks) attempt to
overwhelm the routers, switches, firewalls, and hubs in the host’s local network (its Intranet). There are
alsoVolumetricattacksthatattempttouseuptheInternetbandwidthfeedingthehost.
DDoSMonitoring
Prolexic monitors traffic through a client’s system with its DDoS experts
located in the Prolexic Security Operations Center (SOC). Monitoring
servicesareprovidedforLevel3,4,and7attacks.
Many attacks are orchestrated by live hackers. As a consequence, the
characteristics of an attack can change in real time during the attack.
Mitigation strategies must react in real time to keep up with the hackers.
The Prolexic SOC supplants its automated tools for attack monitoring with
humanexperience.
Prolexicmonitoringservicesinclude:
PLXfbm (flow-based monitoring provides early detection and notification of Level 3 and Level 4 DDoS
attacks by directly monitoring customer edge routers without the need to insert additional hardware
components into the traffic flow. It is these edge routers that are the gateway into the customer’s system
formalicioustraffic.
The PLXfbm service looks for anomalies in volumetric
traffic flow through the routers at the Level 3 and Level 4
layers. This information is sent to the SOC where
experienced technicians use flow-based monitoring tools
to detect DDoS attacks. In the event of a suspected
attack, a recommended action plan is provided to the
client.This actionplanmayinclude arecommendation for
immediate protection by rerouting traffic through the
ProlexicDDoSmitigationnetwork.
PLXfbm detectsseveraltypesofattacks,includingTCPabuse,UDPfloods,andICMPfloods.Attacksare
typicallyidentifiedwithinfifteenminutes.
PLXabm (application-based monitoring) provides real-time monitoring of application level (Level 7)
attacks. These attacks cause the greatest financial devastation to online businesses. PLXabm generates
Layer 7 behaviour analysis and alerts via an onsite appliance to enable Prolexic technicians in the SOC
to pinpoint exactly from where the DDoS attack is coming, even as signatures (known malicious code
blocks)change.Thereisnoadditionalhardwareinsertedintothetrafficflow.
Prolexic’s onsite PLXabm appliance collects the data and sends it back to Prolexic’s SOC, where alerts,
long-term statistical metrics, baselines, and forensic sets are created. Once a DDoS vector and attacker
behaviouraredetermined,thePLXabm applianceisconfiguredtoautomaticallysendattackerinformation
backtoProlexictomitigateinthecloud.
PLXabm detects application-layer GET and POST floods that attempt to issue these commands to
applicationprocesses.
3
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

DDoSMitigation
Prolexic’s mitigation services route client traffic through Prolexic’s closest scrubbing center and return
clean data to the client’s systems. Data flow is monitored by Prolexic mitigation experts who identify,
analyze, and remove malicious traffic, allowing only legitimate traffic to flow through the scrubbing center
back to the customer. If the attacker changes signatures, the mitigation experts will detect them
immediately with Prolexic’s proprietary monitoring tools and take defensive action until all DDoS activity
ends.
During mitigation, outgoing customer traffic flows directly to the Internet. A scrubbing center can mitigate
DDoSattacksupto200gbps.
Therearethreemechanismstoreroutetraffictoascrubbingcenter:
PLXproxyusesthecustomer’sDNSservertoreroutetraffic.Thecustomer’sDNSentriesarechangedto
redirect selected URLs to the Prolexic scrubbing center. Virtual IP addresses (VIPs) are advertised from
each of the Prolexic scrubbing centers to allow automatic routing of malicious or clean traffic to the
optimumscrubbingcenter.Thescrubbingcentersarereadytoaccepttrafficimmediately.
PLXrouted reroutes traffic at the interface of the client’s local network with the Internet. The Generic
Route Encapsulation protocol (GRE) is used to construct virtual connections to the client’s routers,
enabling Prolexic routers and client routers to “see” each other as directly connected via a tunnel. The
Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) is used to communicate network advertisements from the client site to
Prolexic.Thesenetworkadvertisementsareusedtoactivateanddeactivatetheserviceasneeded.
PLXconnect delivers Prolexic’smitigationservices via adirectphysicalconnectiontoascrubbingcenter.
PLXconnect provides a higher throughput with lower latency than the other mitigation options.
Connectionscancarryupto10gbpsoftraffic.
OtherServices
PLXsert (Prolexic Security Engineering and Response Team) analyzes global DDoS attack data to
understand the sources and attributes of DDoS attacks around the world. PLXsert distributes this data to
custmersinseveralways:
 ItreleasesquarterlyglobalDDoSattackreports.
 ItissuesDDoSthreatadvisorieswhenappropriate.
 ItmaintainsanIPreputationaldatabaseidentifyinganddetailingactivebotnets.
 ItdeliversdataforensicstoProlexiccustomersasanoptionalsubscriptionservice.
PLXplanner asksthecustomeraseriesofin-depthquestionsaboutitsITandnetworkingenvironment.It
offers tips and advice along the way, and ends up with a report that the customer can use to evaluate its
DDoS protection strategy. It provides the customer a path forward to take proactive protective steps if
necessary.
PLXpatrol provides a global snapshot of current DDoS activity via its Attack Tracker display. It shows
from where attacks against Prolexic clients are originating, and ranks the countries that have originated
themostattacksagainstProlexiccustomersoverthelast24hoursandsince2009.
4
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Mitigation SLAs
Prolexic provides SLAs for both the time that it takes to identify an attack and the time that it takes to
mitigatetheattack.Forinstance,itsmitigationSLAprovidesthefollowingtimeguarantees:
AttackType TimetomitigateSLA
(minutes)
UDP/ICMPFloods 5
SYNFloods 5
TCPFlagAbuses 5
GET/POSTFloods 20
DNSReflection 10
DNSAttack 10
Mitigation Subscription
Prolexic provides it mitigation services on a subscription basis. The subscription fee is based on the
customer’s network topology and the amount of data it handles. It there is an attack, the mitigation
servicesarecoveredbythesubscriptionfee.Therearenoadditionalfees.
Summary
Not only are DDoS attacks here to stay, they are getting bigger and more frequent. In a recent report,
Gartnerstated:3
“DDoS mitigation services should be a standard part of business continuity/disaster recovery
planning and be included in all Internet service procurements when the business depends on the
availability of Internet connectivity. Any Internet-enabled application that requires guaranteed
levelsofavailabilityshouldemployDDoSprotectiontomeetthoserequirements.”
Companies must be prepared for the unexpected DDoS attack. Mitigation services such as those from
Prolexicareperhapstheultimatedefense.
3HypeCycleforInfrastructureprotection,2011,GartnerWhitePaper;August10,2011.
5
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com