Large Hadron Collider Running Out of Disk
October2016
The Large Hadron Collider (LHC) is a massive machine that accelerates protons
speeding in opposite directions to study the effects of proton collisions. The results of
collisions arerecordedon harddisk forlateranalysis. TheLHC wasoriginallyoutfitted
with enough disk to handle its anticipated data storage needs for years. However, collision rates have
beenfarmorethanexpected,andtheLHCisnowrunningoutofdiskspace.
The Large Hadron Collider
The LHC is by far the most expansive machine ever implemented by man. It is arguably one of the most
important scientific tools humanity has ever come up with. It allows us to glimpse what happens at the
subatomiclevel.
The LHC is located at CERN, the European Organization for Nuclear Research, in Geneva, Switzerland.
Constructed between 1983 and 1988, it is a circular superconducting tunnel seventeen miles in
circumference straddling the Swiss/French border. It is twelve feet wide, and its depth ranges from 164
feetto574feetunderground.
TheLargeHadronCollider
The largest machine in the world, it is designed to smash protons together at nearly the speed of light.
The LHC is actually a series of looped accelerators, each designed to speed protons over a certain
range. Each accelerator is equipped with more and more powerful magnets to accelerate protons in
opposite directions first up to 99% of the speed of light and ultimately up to 99.9999% of the speed of
light.
1
©2016SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

There are four laboratories spaced around the LHC that have batteries of sensors to monitor the
collisions. The sensors monitor the subatomic rubble that results from the collisions to scrutinize it for
novelparticlesandtheforcesthatholdthemtogether.
The LHC is administered by thousands of scientists from hundreds of countries around the world. Their
activitiesarecoordinatedbyCERN.
Worldwide LHC Computing Grid
The LHC generates tens of petabytes of data each year. This mass of data is processed by the
Worldwide LHC Computing Grid. This is an international collaborative project supporting a grid-based
computer network comprising 170 computing facilities in 36 countries. It is the world’s largest computing
grid.
The LHC Computing Grid was designed by CERN to handle the prodigious amount of data produced by
theLHC.TheGridcomprises200,000processingcoresand150petabytes(150x1015)ofdiskspace.
The LHC generates about 300 gigabytes (300 x 109) of data per second, which is filtered down to about
300megabytespersecond.Thisamountstoabout27terabytes(27x1012)ofrawdataperday.
Overall,about25petabytesofdataaregeneratedeachyearandmustbestoredandprocessed.
The Unanticipated Data Rates
TheLHCisrunningoutofdiskspace.Ithasbeenverystableandveryreliable,andthatistheproblem.
When the LHC was designed, scientists expected that it would be running a third of the time. The rest of
the time would be used for maintenance. Instead, the LHC has been running 70% of the time,more than
twice what was expected. This may be the first time in history that technicians made a bad estimate of
uptimeinthewrongdirection.
Coupled with the extended running time and an increase in the LHC power leading to a higher rate of
proton collisions, the amount of data that is being generated is far in excess of what was originally
anticipated. The LHC is currently producing about a billion proton collisions per second. This year alone,
the LHC had produced roughly the same number of collisions as it did during all of the previous years of
operationputtogether.
Since April, the LHC has produced roughly 2.4 quadrillion (2.4 x 1015) particle collisions, and this rate is
scheduled to increase. The LHC is scheduled to be operational until 2037, and the 2.4 quadrillion
collisions represents just 1% of the total number of collisions planned during its lifetime. The LHC is
scheduledtoundergoseveralroundsofupgradestofurtherincreaseitscollisionrate.
Lessons from Proton Collisions
As the speed of proton collisions increases, scientists can learn more about the rare processes and
particles that make up the subatomic world. It was the faster collisions that led scientists to finally detect
the Higgs boson, the particle (or actually the energy packet) that provides mass to other particles. The
Higgs bosonhadbeen predictedmany years ago(byDr.Peter Higgs andfiveother scientists in1964). A
Higgsbosoniscreatedaboutonceforeverybillionprotoncollisions.
There are a number of different experiments going on with the LHC, and they all have to jockey for time
ontheaccelerator.
2
©2016SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Great Expectations from Fewer Collisions
Attheotherendofthespeedscaleis theAtlas experiment.Itisstudyinglowspeed,lowenergycollisions
of protons. This occurs when two protons survive their collisions – they bounce and head off in slightly
different directions without creating any new particles. The experiment hopes to use this study to
understandwhycosmicrayssplitintosecondaryparticlewhentheystriketheEarth’satmosphere.
Another low energy experiment is TOTOM. This experiment hopes to measure the probability that two
protons can pass directlythrough one another without interactingatall. After all,a proton is mostlyempty
space,beingmakeupofthreequarksheldtogetherbygluon.
TheTOTEMandAtlasexperimentsrundetectorsonbothsidesoftwoofthebigLHCdetectors.They
studytheprotonsastheycomeoutofelasticscatteringinteractionsatslightlychangedangles
Running Out of Disk Storage
TheLHC is running out of disk spacetostore theresults of all of its experiments.Itis recordingcollisions
70%ofthetime,twiceitsexpectedratewhentheLHCwasoriginallydesigned.
The number of drives that were purchased were determined years in advance based on projected
luminosity (the collision rate). The LHC is outperforming all of its original estimates. Technical staff has
hadtoconsolidateoldsimulationsanddatatomakeroomfordatafornewcollisions.
The current hard drives have a 250 petabyte capacity. LHC is buying additional drives to handle the
overflow.Itstechnicalstaffisalsoexploringotheroptionssuchasahybridsystemthatincorporatescloud
computingwithstorageanddataanalytics.
AllLHCexperimentsareplanningtoupgradetheirexperimentalinfrastructureduringthewinterof2017.
3
©2016SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Summary
The LHC is the most important tool scientists have to study the subatomic world. It has already
discovered the Higgs boson and several other particles that result from proton collisions. As its energy is
increased,itisyetunknownwhatotherdiscoveriesitwillmake.
Theamountofdatathatis generatedandthatmustbestoredandprocessedis extraordinarilylarge.This
has led to an underestimate of the amount of data that must be stored. The LHC is being outfitted with
petabytesofadditionalstoragetomanagethisdataexplosion.
Acknowledgements
Informationforthisarticlewastakenfromthefollowingsources:
HowdoestheLargeHadronColliderwork?,ExtremeTech;July25,2015.
Pop!GoestheWeasel! AvailabilityDigest;June2016.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/1106/cern_weasel.pdf
Greatexpectationsfromfewercollisions,CERN;September22,2016.
LHCsmashesoldcollisionrecords,Symmetry;September29,2016.
TheLargeHadronColliderisrunningoutofdiskspace,ExtremeTech;October3,2016.
PhysicsHasaProblem–TheLargeHadronColliderIsRunningoutofDiskSpace,Futurism;undated.
WorldwideLHCComputingGrid,Wikipedia.
4
©2016SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com