NHSBT
UK National Health Service – Blood & Transplant
October2008
NHS Blood & Transplant (NHSBT) is part of the UK’s National Health Service and is responsible
for blood services and organ transplantation throughout the UK. The organization manages the
supply of blood to hospitals throughout England and North Wales, tracking blood from when it is
first donated, through its testing and separation into various products, and, finally, to its dispatch
tohospitals.
NHSBT has a particularly important role to play following any major incident where people might
be injured and where blood is urgently needed to save lives. Therefore, the efficient operation of
NHSBT’s computing infrastructure is of paramount importance in ensuring that patients receive
thebloodtheyrequire.
To ensure the effective management and processing of data under all circumstances, NHSBT
has two physically separate data centers using split-site OpenVMS clusters that provide multiple
levels of redundancy. NHSBT has recently delivered a major upgrade to this system – an
upgrade that was accomplished with minimal disruption to service. This article describes the
developmentanddeliveryofthenewNHSBTsystem.
NHSBT Facts & Figures
NHSBlood&Transplant’sservicesinclude:
 promotingblood,tissue,andorgandonationtothepublic.
 managingthesupplyofbloodtohospitalsinEnglandandNorthWales.
 workingwithhospitalcolleaguestopromotethesafeandappropriateuseofblood.
 providingarangeoftissuestohospitals.
 managingorgandonationintheUK.
 managingtheBritishBoneMarrowRegister.
There are roughly 2.5 million blood donations per year. NHS Blood & Transplant
(www.blood.co.uk)tracksandmanagestheseblooddonorsandthebloodtheydonate.NHSBT is
the sole provider of blood and the majorityof blood components to the National Health Service in
EnglandandNorthWalesandalsotoprivatehealthcareproviders.
Every blood sample is individually screened, identified, and tracked. A blood sample is usually
split into one or more products, including red cells, plasma, and platelets. These products are
storedinthirteencentersaroundthecountry.
1
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

The National Data-Centre Complex
TheBirthofPULSE
The data-processing application that manages all of this activity is called PULSE. PULSE
managesthecoreoperationsofNHSBT,including:
 administrationofdonorsanddonationrecords.
 testingofdonations.
 manufactureofbloodcomponentsintobloodproducts.
 issueofbloodproducts.
The origins of PULSE go back to the early 1980s when the blood supply at the various regional
transfusioncenters wasmanagedbydifferentandincompatiblesystems.Therewasnoeasyway
togetanoverallviewofEngland’sbloodsupplyortomovebloodfromonecentertoanother.
One of these systems, which ran at several centers, was called MITHRAS. MITHRAS ran on a
DEC VAX system using the Mimer SQL database. When the National Blood Authority was
created from the regional transfusion centers in 1994, it set out to select a single system from
competing suppliers. In the 1997 to 1998 timeframe, it selected MITHRAS and renamed it
PULSE.
Because of its MITHRAS legacy, the initial version of PULSE ran on HP (originally DEC, then
Compaq) AlphaServers under OpenVMS with SCSI HSZ disk arrays and FDDI cluster
interconnects. A second generation of PULSE upgraded to ES45 AlphaServers with a localized
storageareanetwork(SAN)usingHSG80diskarraysandGigabitEthernetclusterinterconnects.
PULSE was installed in three independent data centers throughout England. They each served
the blood centers in their region - Bristol in the southwest, London in the southeast, and Leeds in
thenorth.Eachofthedatacenterscontainedinformationonlyonthedonorsinitsregion.
The three independent databases were not fully integrated and reflected the social and
organizationalstructuresofthetime,whichcreatedsomeoperationalproblems:
 Thetransferofproductsbetweendatacenterswasclumsyandinefficient.
 Donorswerenotrecognizedinaregionnotservicedbytheirdatacenters.
 If an NHSBT center was compromised, blood collection, production, and blood product
transferswerecomplexiftheyhadtotakeplaceacrossregionaldata-centerboundaries.
 Auditingofblood-producttransfersanddonorrelocationswasdifficult.
 Duplicatereference tables for commondatahadtobe maintainedateachdatacenter for
eachdatabase.Change-controlproceduresweredifficulttomanage.
 The requirement to perform database joins across three disparate databases to provide
managementinformationaddedconsiderablecomplexity.
 National queries were available only for certain functions as each query had to access
thethreeregionaldatabasesseparatelyandjointhereturnedresults.
Itwasclearthatthethreedatabasesshouldbeconsolidatedintoasinglenationaldatabase.
2
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

StructuringforHighAvailabilityandDisasterTolerance
The availability requirements of the PULSE system are not as difficult to achieve as those of a
real-time mission-critical system such as an air traffic control system.Though the PULSE system
is both safety-critical and mission-critical, millisecond response times are not required. In fact, if
the system is unavailable for a few minutes, this is generally acceptable. However, the system
cannot suffer a loss of service for an extended period of time without extremely careful planning.
In the event of a major incident where many people are injured, blood products must be
immediately available and have to be moved quickly from their places of storage to where they
areneeded.
Consequently,thesystemmustbedesignedtosurvivemultiplefailures.Thesystemcanbedown
forshortperiods(itsServiceLevelAgreementisforthree9sorabouteighthoursofdowntimeper
year),butitmustbeextremelyresilienttofailuresofanykind,includingatotalsiteoutage.
StructuringforImprovedEfficiency
To accomplish the required database consolidation while meeting its availability requirements,
PULSE was moved in 2002 to a new National Data Centre Complex (NDCC) comprising duplex
datacentersattwophysicallyseparatelocations.
The three separate databases were collocated in the NDCC and ran on OpenVMS AlphaServer
clusters.ThePULSEserviceloadwasbalancedbetweenthetwoNDCCdatacenters.
The databases were still not consolidated as regional partitioning still applied. The databases for
the three distinct regions were stored in separate databases, each running on its own OpenVMS
cluster.However,thesystem couldnow providelimitednationalviews of data to aclient byusing
middlewaretomergedatafromthethreedatabases.
In addition, applications were becoming more complex; and there was a desire to move from the
oldcharacter-cellinterfacestoamodernGUIinterface.
Therefore, in 2007-2008, the PULSE system went through another major upgrade to create a
singlenationaldatabaseandtoimprove the overalllevelof availability. This upgradehadtomeet
aseriesofchallenges:
 The single-tiered architecture of the original PULSE system had to be replaced with a
moreflexiblethree-tieredarchitectureprovidingclient,application,anddatabasetiers.
 The design and specification of new hardware, a new version of the OpenVMS operating
system, new storage subsystems, a new version of the Mimer SQL database, and
updated PULSE applications had to be such that PULSE could run unchanged so far as
theuserswereconcerned.
 The migration to the new system had to be done with minimal interruption to PULSE
services.
 The old and new systems had to work in parallel until the old system had been
decommissioned.
 Thethreedatabaseshadtobemergedintoonewithminimalimpactonoperations.
3
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

 The time to restore services to users in the event of a failure needed to be minimized.
This led to the implementation of “fast restart” capability in the Mimer SQL database
server.
OpenVMSClusters
The new PULSE system runs on a system platform built using OpenVMS Integrity split-site,
disaster-tolerantclusters.
Before describing the new PULSE architecture, let us briefly review OpenVMS clustering.
OpenVMS clusters are the “founding fathers” of today’s cluster technologies. What’s more, even
though they were first-to-market by decades, they still have several significant advantages over
most,ifnotall,oftoday’sclustertechnologies.1
OpenVMS clusters are “shared everything” with a coordinated cluster-wide file system that
provides cluster-wide record-level locking. Each node may have the same files open for true
cluster-wide, shared read-write access. The distributed lock manager is the key component to
making “shared everything” clusters work, and it ensures the synchronization and serialization of
operationsacrosstheentirecluster.
The terms “cluster-aware” and “cluster-tolerant” are relevant here. Cluster-aware means that the
software knows that it is running on a cluster and makes active use of the distributed lock
manager for simultaneous access to the database files byall participating nodes. Cluster-tolerant
means that the software will run on a cluster but may not use any or all of the cluster-locking
facilities.ThePULSEsystemfits intothis latter categorysincetheMimer SQLdatabasemanager
and the PULSE applications run in an active/hot-standby mode. Failover of the applications and
the Mimer SQL database is very fast because of the Mimer SQL database’s “fast restart”
capabilitydescribedlater.
TheUpgradedPULSESystem
The upgraded PULSE system achieves its high availability and its extreme tolerance to disasters
through the extensive use of parallelism and equipment redundancy in its architecture, its data-
storagesystems,anditsnetworkinfrastructure
ProductionSystem
Theupgraded PULSEsystem comprises athree-tieredarchitecture.Theproductionconfiguration
issimilarineachdatacenterwithsomedifferences:
 The Presentation tier (the client tier) comprises Win32 systems running a Citrix
Presentation Server (now Citrix XenApp). Currently split between the data centers are
overonehundredsuchservers,eachservingthirtytofortythinclientsinthefield.
 The Application tier currently comprises two COM+ systems in each data center. They
run as a load-balanced server farm. This configuration may soon be expanded to four
systems per data center. The application servers are not clustered. Rather, they share
theapplicationload.
 The Database tier comprises redundant databases running on a four-node, split-site
OpenVMS cluster. The subcluster configuration at each data center comprises two HP
Itanium server nodes –an HPIntegrityrx6600server (a7U machinewithuptofour dual-
1OpenVMSActive/ActiveSplit-SiteClusters,AvailabilityDigest;June,2008.
4
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

core processors and 192GB memory) and a smaller HP Integrity rx2660 server (a 2U
machinewithuptotwodual-coreprocessorsand32GBmemory).
datacenter1 datacenter2
productioncluster
rx2660 rx2660
rx6600 2x1gbs* rx6600
HP HP
Integrity Integrity
2x2.5gbs*
EVA
WAN EVA 4100 WAN
presentation 4100 presentation
servers servers
application *sharedwithtest application
servers andtraining servers
COM+ cluster COM+
testandtrainingcluster
WAN WAN
presentation rx2660 presentation
servers servers
rx6600 rx2660
HP
rx2660
Integrity
EVA EVA
4100 4100
NBSNDCC
 The database files reside on a number of “shadow sets,” which are OpenVMS HBVS
(host-based volume shadowing) devices that synchronously replicate the data across
three physically separate HP EVA 4100 storage arrays. HBVS ensures that all members
of a shadow set are consistent and are correctly reconstructed with copy/merge
operations if a node or a storage device should fail. Two of the EVA 4100 storage arrays
arelocatedatonedatacenter,andoneofthearraysislocatedattheotherdatacenter.
 The Mimer SQL database server maintains its own large buffer pools in 64-bit address
space for performance, with up to 16GB memory being reservable for this space. The
Mimer SQL database runs on a single cluster node at any one time, with the other
databaseservernodesin“hotstandby”modeandreadyforfailoverifnecessary.
TestandTraining
Liketheproductionsystem, NHSBT has implemented afour-node, split-siteOpenVMScluster for
testing and training. In this case, the subcluster nodes at one site comprise an HP Integrity
rx6600 server and an rx2660 server, just like the production cluster. The subcluster nodes at the
other site areapair of HPIntegrityrx2660servers.Bothsites haveanadditionaltestandtraining
EVAstoragearraymanagedbythetestandtrainingcluster.
The test and training nodes are provided to train blood service staff and systems-management
staff, to test PULSE upgrades, and to test failover procedures. They also provide the facilities to
testnewreleasesoftheoperating-systemsoftwareandequipmentfirmware.
