Media Communication During a Crisis
May2011
When a disaster strikes your data center, that’s no time to have to start worrying about how you
are going to deal with the press. You have your hands full with worrying about the well-being of
your employees if faced with a physical disaster; with recovering your IT operations, which may
take days; with communicating with customers and suppliers to keep them informed; with
answering panic calls from your management; with perhaps having to relocate and house
employeesandseetotheirpersonalneeds;andwithamyriadothercrisisduties.
If you have not planned beforehand for media communication during a crisis, a second crisis is
looming. If this is a major outage affecting millions of users or thousands of businesses, as were
the Amazon cloud failure1 and the PlayStation hacking fiasco,2 described in other articles in this
issue,there will be afeedingfrenzybythe press and bythebloggers. Everypublication will tryto
be the first with the most sensational news, and much of this reporting may be erroneous if it is
notcarefullycontrolled.Erroneousreportingcancausegreatconfusionamongotherstakeholders
with whom youarecommunicating yourownmessage,suchas youremployees,yourcustomers,
yoursuppliers,yourmanagement,andyourshareholders.
Today, a great deal of publicity regarding data-center crises comes from the growing body of
bloggers. They can have a significant impact on the public, but from where do they get their
information? To a small extent, it comes from inside sources; but to a large extent, it is sourced
from the public press and augmented by their own imaginations and opinions. Keep the press
informed,andthebloggerswillbeinformed.
Dr. Robert Chandler, Director of the Nicholson School of Communication at the University of
Central Florida, specializes in crisis communication.3 Following the recent triple disaster in Japan
– earthquake, tsunami, near-nuclear meltdown – Dr. Chandler gave several webinars on crisis
communication. Though much of his focus in these webinars was on natural disasters, his points
areequallyrelevanttoanydata-centerdisaster.4
In this article, we use Dr. Chandler’s observations on crisis communications to discuss relations
withthemediafollowingadata-centerfailure.
1Amazon’sCloudDownedbyFatFinger,AvailabilityDigest;May2011.
2SonyPlayStationTakenDownforWeeksbyHackers,AvailabilityDigest;May2011.
3RobertC.Chandler,PhD.,EmergencyNotification,PraegerPublishers;2010.
4 Many of Dr. Chandler’s webinars are sponsored by Everbridge, a company marketingcrisis-communication products.
Thewebinarscanbefoundathttp://www.everbridge.com/webinars.
1
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

The Stages of a Crisis
Acrisistypicallypassesthroughaseriesofstages.
Warning
Certain types of crises give enough warning so that precautionary steps can be taken. For
example, hurricanes, floods, snow storms, and epidemics can be predicted with some certainty
(or atleastwithaprobabilityof occurrence);andplans canbemadetocontinueoperations inthe
event that the crisis materializes. This can include evacuation plans, indications of when
employeesshouldnotreporttowork,thepreparationofbackupfacilitiesorfacilitiesfortemporary
homeoffices,instructionsforreportingtoanalternatefacility,andsoon.
Other crises occur without warning. Examples of these are major equipment failures (such as a
redundant storage failure), hackers, power outages, fires, earthquakes, workplace violence, and
terroristacts.Othereventsmaygivemarginalwarning,suchastornadosandpublicriots.
RiskAssessment
Every good business continuity plan should have an emergency-response plan. Depending upon
thepending(or existing) crisis,the appropriate internal people neededto handlethecrisis should
benotifiedandtheemergencyresponseplanactivated.
At this point, all communication is internal and is sent only to the plan’s decision makers. Public
communicationoccursduringthenextphase.
Response
Once a crisis actuallytakes place, the crisis team notifies those responsible for taking immediate
action.Focus is thenshiftedtonotifyingthemasses –employees,customers,suppliers,etc.This
isthetimetostarttobriefthepress.
Management
From this pointon,thecrisis couldmovetowardresolution;or itcouldget worsethananticipated.
Ifitgetsworse,itprobablygetsmorecomplex;andtheresponsemayhavetobemodified.
During the crisis, the organization must provide regular status updates to its various audiences,
including the press. Instructions may have to modified, and the outlook for resolution may
change.
Resolution
Once the crisis is drawing to a conclusion, the return to normalcymust be communicated. At this
time, it is appropriate to draw attention to any erroneous reporting by the press. It is also a good
timetogiveadetailedpostmortemtothepressastowhatoccurredandhowitwashandled.5
5SeethedetailedpostmortemgivenbyAmazon,asdetailedinourcompanionarticle,Amazon’sCloudDownedbyFat
Finger. This is an excellent example of satisfying the press, though Amazon was criticized for being slow in releasing
information.
2
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Recovery
Focus on getting back to normal. It is now time to convert this strategy to an opportunity.
Acknowledge the shortcomings in your approach to the crisis, and communicate how you are
goingtorectifytheminthefuture.
Media Relations
In our introduction above, we said ”much of this [press] reporting may be erroneous if it is not
carefully controlled.” But how can you control the press? The answer is that you can’t. But what
you can do is to work closely with the press and to make sure that they get timely and consistent
information.
That is the essence of Dr. Chandler’s advice. Working with the press may seem like an
oxymoron, but one thing thatis ananathematoanypublication is to publishinformationthat later
turns out to be wrong. Consequently, the press will pay attention to what you are saying. But
make sure that your message reflects accurately the current state of your knowledge about the
crisisandthatthesuccessionofmessagesthatyouissueareconsistent.
Dr.Chandlersuggestsforconsiderationfiveprioritiesinyourmessaging.
OptimalTiming
The timing of messaging is critical. If a message is released too early, it maybe irrelevant. If it is
issuedtoolateorcontainstoolittleinformation,itmaybeirrelevant.
If a storage system fails, maybe it can be recovered in a few hours. If news of the failure were to
beimmediatelyreleased,fewmaycare.Ontheother hand,ifitturnsoutthatthedatabasehas to
be restored from tape, and it will be three days before IT services are restored, this is relevant
andimportantinformation.
MessageContent
The releases to the press must reflect your best estimate of the situation. This estimate may
change as the crisis unfolds, and it is important to keep the press informed as the situation
progresses.
It may be embarrassing to admit that your earlier prognosis of a speedy recovery measured in
hours now appears to have changed to a recovery estimated to be days. However, if you do not
immediately acknowledge this, it is going to come out anyway. If the press finds out that you
knewcriticalinformationlongbeforeyoureleasedit,youwillhavelosttheconfidenceofthepress
–andofthebloggers–whowillnowstarttospeculateonwhatthesituationreallyis.
Up-to-date, consistent information will keep the press synchronized so long as they have trust in
yourmessaging.
MaintainControl
Youmustmaintaincontrolof yourmessaging.Typically, youwillappointoneandonlyoneperson
tospeak tothepress.Thatpersoncertainlycanquoteotherofficialsinthecompany,buthavinga
singleinformationoutletisthebestcontroltoensurethatyourmessagingisconsistent.
A major part of retaining control is to carefully monitor the press, the bloggers, and even your
competition,touncover anyrumorsormediaspin.As yousee yourmessagebecomingdistorted,
you must immediately respond with the accurate information. This is the reason that you must
3
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

never get caught in a deception. Once that happens, all of your following messaging will be
discounted.
Transparency
Based on our many Never Again stories, it is clear that transparency is your best weapon. The
truth will eventually come out. If you stonewall the truth or attempt to deceive the press as you
progress through the crisis, they may not be in your corner for the next crisis you face. On the
other hand, if you are known for your honesty and transparency, the responsible press will be
verysupportiveofthepainyoucurrentlyaresuffering.
It is important to communicate what you currently know, not what you think the public needs to
know.
A very effective strategy that many companies have adopted is to maintain a service-level
dashboardontheir websites.Thesedashboards showthecurrentstatus of allservices,Services
thatareingriefarehighlighted,theproblemsexplained,andthecurrentstatusofrecoveryclearly
predicted and kept updated. Dashboards are an important source of pertinent and consistent
informationforthepress.
OptimalDeliveryChannels
As we said earlier, you should have a controlled media-information channel to ensure that all
messages to the public are consistent. This is typically done by designating a single person to
interfacewiththepress.Allotherinvolvedpersonnel–includingC-levelexecutives–shoulddefer
tothiscontactforinformation.
Your messaging should be high-volume. Don’t worry about putting out too much information. Let
thepressfilteritanddecidewhattheywanttouse.Youwillfindthateachpublicationwillpickand
choosedifferentbitsofinformationthatyouprovideandwillcasttheirstoriesalongdifferentlines.
Whatisimportantisthatthesestoriesareconsistent.
Above all, be responsive to the press.When a reporter calls, talk to him or her; and be as candid
as possible.Whoknows, one mayask that one question that will lead to a scoop. You then have
afriendforlife.
Preplanned Messaging
Whenacrisishits,thatis notthetimetohavetoworryaboutgeneratingmessagingforthepress.
Ofcourse,youwillhavetodoso.Buttotheextentthatyoucan,preplan your messaging.Having
skeleton messages in which you can fill in the details will be a big help when you have more
importantthingstodoinresponsetoacrisis.
Thepossiblecauses for a crisis aretypicallytoomanytotryto address upfront. Inaddition, there
aretoomanycrisesthat youmayneverbeabletoconceive(likethedatacenterthathadallofits
servers confiscated by law enforcement for two days to support an investigation). Rather, focus
ontheimpactofthecrisis–impactsrepresentamuchmoremanageablenumber.
What will you do if you lose a major system? What will you do if you lose your data and have to
do a multiday recovery from tape? What will you do if some tapes are unreadable and you lose
some data? What will you do if your data center is running fine, but nobody can get in (flood,
pandemic, riots)? What will you do if your data center is destroyed? What will you do if you are
hacked,andsensitivecustomerdataiscompromised?
4
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

These are examples of the categories for which you can create prepared messages. Each
problemcouldhavebeencausedbymyriadsofdisasters,buttheeffectisthesame.
Summary
Perhaps the most important of Dr. Chandler’s priorities is transparency. Transparency can be
difficult. During the crisis, evidence may suggest one set of problems; but the root cause of the
disastermightturnouttobesomethingdifferent.Ifyouareperfectlytransparent,youmayexpose
vulnerabilitiesthatmaybeembarrassingandthatinhindsightyouneednothaveexposed.
Furthermore, your lawyers may bring pressure not to mention certain issues if they feel that they
couldencouragelawsuitsagainstyourcompany.
However,thedownsideofnotbeingtransparentisinconsistentmessaging.Youmayfindyourself
boxed intoasituation that you describedinone waybutthathas turned out tobe embarrassingly
different.
In both of our companion articles on the PlayStation and Amazon disasters, the companies were
honest and forthcoming, though perhaps a little late. Sony tried at first to state that no personal
information had been stolen bythe hackers but had to confess later that indeed such information
was compromised. They then took the position that no credit-card numbers were stolen, but that
is yet to be seen. Also, they kept predicting that gaming services would be restored in days. It is
nowthreeweeks,andtheseserviceshaveyettocomebackonline.
Amazon did an amazing job of publishing a detailed post mortem of exactly what caused its
multidayfailure, even though the report exposed some perhaps embarrassing faults in Amazon’s
infrastructure.
5
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com