Try Doing This Today
August2013
In today’s technology with gigabytes of memorypacked into small laptop computers having
gigahertz of speed, we forget (or never knew) what it was like in the 1960s and 1970s to
develop major systems. Let’s go back to those days when memory was measured in
kilobytesandprocessorspeedwasmeasuredinmegahertzandseewhatmiracles(intoday’sperception)
wereachieved.Thinkaboutwhatitwouldtaketodothistoday.
A Payroll Services Company
MiniData Payroll Services was established in
1969. Its vision was to provide payroll services
to small companies using low-cost computing.
When it went into operation, its primary
competitor was the soon-to-be giant ADP,
whichwasignoringthesmall-companymarket.
MiniData’sbillboardadsread:
Youpayus9
We’llpay15
The message was that MiniData would do a
fifteenmanpayrollfor$9.
To accomplish this, MiniData purchased a Digital Equipment Corporation PDP-8 computer. The PDP-8
was at that time the best-selling of DEC’s computers (later to be overshadowed by the PDP-11, which
was theforerunner of theVAX andVMS).Abasic PDP-8cost$18,000andcamewith4Kofmemorywith
a 12-bit word length (back then, a character was six bits – ASCII had yet to make it into the computer
world). Yes – four kilowords of memory, not four megawords of memory. In today’s terminology, it was
basicallyan8Kmachine.Itsprocessingspeedwasablindingonemegahertz–1/1000oftoday’sspeeds.
The I/O devices that camewith the basic PDP-8 included a Model 33 ASR Teletype machine that printed
at ten characters per second. It used paper tape for its primary I/O, reading paper tape at a rate of 200
characters per second and punching paper tape at 60 characters per second. The Teletype and paper
tapeunitsused8-bitASCIIcode.
TothebasicPDP-8model,MiniDataaddedanother4Kofmemory(givingit16K6-bitbytes),128Kofdisk
storage, andfour 250KDECtapes.TheDECtapes hadthe interestingcapabilityof beingable toreadand
rewrite sectors on tape – they were effectively sequential disk storage devices. A high-speed 300 line-
per-minuteprinterroundedouttheconfiguration.
1
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

The PDP-8 came with virtually no operating system except for the device drivers. The MiniData payroll
applications were written in SAIBOL-8 (SAI Business Oriented Language) developed by its parent,
Sombers Associates, Inc. SAIBOL-8 was a COBOL-like language implemented as an interpretive
compiler.Basically,eachverbwasasubroutinecallthatexecutedthefunctionsoftheverb.
The software architecture for the payroll applications used the lower 4K bank of memory to hold the
device drivers and the SAIBOL-8 subroutines. It also included a page-swapping system for swapping 4K
blocksofSAIBOL-8routinesfromthediskintotheupper4Kofmemory.
The payroll customer database was held on the DECtapes. Customer records could be read from the
DECtapesandupdatedbyrewritingthedataontothetapes.
Oneproblem thatMiniData facedwas that itcouldnot runonepayrollatatime.Todosomeantbreaking
down the line printer for each customer’s processing pass to insert the company’s checks and then
inserting blank paper to printits reports.Tosolvethis problem,MiniData printed checks onblank stock.It
could then print the checks for fiftycustomers at a time followed bythe customer reports, thus essentially
eliminating printer breakdown time. It did its own MICR encoding of the checks (the machine-readable
numbersatthebottomofthechecks)foreachcustomertofinishthepayroll.
MiniData meant with a great deal of success. By the 1980s, it was servicing hundreds of customers and
graduatedtodualPDP-11s.Itisstillinbusinessservicingthousandsofcustomers.
Apollo 11 – Landing a Man on the Moon
We talk a lot about continuous availability – systems that virtually never fail – as if this is a brand new
concept made possible by today’s technologies of fault-tolerant systems, clusters, virtualization, and
active/active systems. But forty years ago, continuously available systems put men on the moon and got
them back several times without a loss. The entire lunar mission, from launch to translunar coast to
landing and then rendezvous and return to earth, were controlled by computers whose failure would
meanthelossoftheastronauts.Againstallodds,allsystemsworkedimpeccablyforthelunarlandings.1
How did the technologies of the ‘60s achieve this near-miracle? Three main computer complexes were
involved in each lunar flight – the ground computers, the onboard guidance computers, and the rocket
computer.
GroundComputers
To put technology into perspective, at that time the
computer industry was just in the process of
converting from vacuum tubes to transistors. The
five computers received by NASA in 1964 were
among the first transistorized IBM 360s delivered.
The 360s had a speed of 1.7 MIPS (million
instructions per second) and contained one
megabyte of memory. Memory was later expanded
to two and then to four megabytes per computer.
Five360swereusedtoprovidehighredundancy.
TheApollo11IBMComputerRoom
The new MVS operating system was a batch-
orientedsystem buthadto doa real-timejob.Specialized communication plug boards were developedto
connecttotheI/O bus toreceivegroundtracking,onboardtelemetry, andtrajectorydata inrealtime.The
1Apollo11–ContinuousAvailability,1960’sStyle,AvailabilityDigest;September2009.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0409/apollo_11.pdf
2
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

plug boards interfaced to the computer bus via a five-way switch so that they could be connected to any
ofthefivecomputers.
At the time, IBM described the six megabyte programs it developed to monitor the spacecraft’s
environmentaldataandtheastronauts'biomedicaldataasthemostcomplexsoftwareeverwritten.
Redundancy was provided via the use of three of the five IBM computers working in parallel. The other
twocomputers were available for testanddevelopmentbutcould be pressed intoproduction if one of the
threeproductioncomputerswentdown.
Of the three production computers, one was the operations computer, one was a dynamic standby, and
one was a static standby. The operations computer and the dynamic standby processed all data in
parallel. If one went down, the other immediately and automatically took over control and became the
operations computer. At this point, the static standby computer was brought into service as the dynamic
standby. It was brought up-to-date by loading the last data checkpoint and then by replaying all
subsequenteventsathighspeed.
During this recovery time, operations continued unimpeded. A total system failure would have required
that following a failure of one of the active computers, the other would fail before the new standby was
synchronized. Even then, only a small amount of data would have been lost; and the system would
quicklyresynchronizewithnewlyreceiveddata.Continuousavailabilitywastrulyachieved.
GuidanceComputers
The onboard Apollo Guidance Computers (AGC) controlled the Columbia Command Module and the
Eagle Lunar Module. They collected flight information, displayed this to the astronauts, and
communicatedittotheground.TheguidancesystemsprovidedformanualcontrolshouldanAGCexhibit
problems.
The AGC was the first computer to use integrated circuits (ICs). All 4,100 ICs were identical three-input
nor (negative or) gates. They were configured to provide flip-flops for data storage and to provide the
logicofthecomputer. TheICsweresocket-mountedandwereinterconnectedbywirewrap.
The memory of each of the AGC lock-stepped computers comprised 2K words of random-access RAM
memoryand36Kof read-onlyROMmemory,each withacycletimeof about12microseconds.Theword
length was 16 bits. The processor ran at a speed of one megahertz and could multitask eight jobs at a
timeviatimeslots.
Modern-day PCs may be more powerful than the AGC, but the AGC did much more than plug into a
printer and a router. It interfaced with ground telemetry links, radar rendezvous systems, landing
altimeters,gyrocompasses,opticalstartrackers,andpropulsionsystems.
TheRocketComputer
The final computer in this trilogy is the one that guided the Saturn 5 rocket at liftoff. The Launch Vehicle
DigitalComputer(LVDC) wasembeddedwithinathree-foothigh,21-footdiameterringthatmountedonto
theSaturnVrocket.Itwasthenervecenterforthelaunchvehicle.
The LVDC had a two megahertz clock rate and contained 32K, 28-bit words. For reliability, it used triple-
redundant logic with voting. Even with this,calculations showed onlya99.6% reliabilityover 250 hours of
operation. On the other hand, imagine the environment in which this computer had to operate. After less
than six hours of productive activity radioing onboard measurements back to Earth and computing
guidance control and engine control, the LVDC completed its life work. The third-stage Saturn V rocket
enginenoseddownintotheocean,andthecomputerringwasturnedloosetoorbitthesun.
3
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Race Track Wagering at Aqueduct, Belmont, and Saratoga
The New York Racing Association (NYRA) operates some of the best known race tracks in the world –
Aqueduct, Belmont, and Saratoga. Belmont is the home of the Belmont Stakes, one of the three racing
eventsthattogetherareknownastheTripleCrown.
All race tracks, including NYRA, operate totalizator systems. A totalizator is the system which
accumulates wagers into pools. Based on the monies accumulated in each pool, it calculates and
displays the current odds that each horse in the race may come in first (win), second (place), or show
(third)anddisplaysthepayoffsforthewinninghorsesattheconclusionoftherace.
Up until the early 1960s, totalizators were electromechanical relay systems. These systems were
inflexible in that adding additional wagering types such as a Daily Double (choosing the first and second
place horses) or a Trifecta (choosing the top three winners) was very difficult. In addition, they were not
asreliableaswouldbedesiredandrequiredcontinualmaintenancebyhighlyskilledtechnicians.
In the early 1960s, NYRA decided to build a computerized totalizator system to solve these problems.
Thishadneverbeendonebefore,soNYRAwasthepioneer.2
Thisfirstcomputerizedtotalizatorsystemwastoperformallofthefunctionsofitselectromechanicalkin.It
needed to service 600 ticket issuing machines (TIMs) generating 1,200 transactions per second. Win,
Place, Show, and Daily Double pools were to be supported; and the system had to be expandable to
handleothertypesofwagering.
The availability of the totalizator system was a critical issue. There had been cases of mechanical
totalizators failing just before a race, and patrons were not able to place bets on a horse that in fact won
and paid big money. This had resulted in riots and significant damage to race track facilities. Therefore,
totalizator failure had to be avoided at all costs. 100% uptime was paramount. The Recovery Time
Objective(RTO)waszero.
In addition, the system had to be protected from data loss should it fail. The pools still had to be
accounted for, and monies still had to be paid out. The Recovery Point Objective, the measure of the
amountofdatathatcouldbelostduetoasystemfailure,wasalsozero.
Thesystem chosenforthis task wastheHoneywellH200(yes,Honeywellwasamajorcomputersupplier
back then). The H200 was a six-bit character-oriented machine, making it an unlikely system for such
requirements. However, it was blazingly fast and had an advanced interrupt system for its time. It was
deemedtobeoneofthefewsystemscapableofhandlingthetransactionworkload.
2CPAatAqueduct,Belmont,andSaratogaRacetracks,AvailabilityDigest;January2007.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/private/0201/nyra.pdf
4
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

The system was designed to be a triplexed system (triple modular redundancy). Three identically
configured H200 systems cooperated in the operation. One acted as the active system, one as a hot
backup,andoneasacoldstandby.
The active system and the backup system were maintained in synchronism via lock-stepping at the
transaction level. Should the active system fail, an operator command switched roles; and the backup
system immediately took over the active role. The only delay in system recovery was the operator’s
decision time to switch over. Should either the active system or the backup system fail, the cold standby
wasputintoserviceasthenewhotbackupsystem.Itwassynchronizedwiththecurrentactivesystem by
transferring the current state of the pools via a memory-to-memory transfer, a process which took only a
fewsecondsandwasdoneconcurrentlywithcontinuedwagering.
To achieve the required 1,200 transaction per second processing rate, all processing of a ticket sale was
doneattheinterruptlevel.
This early, continuously available system remained in operation for almost two decades. It morphed into
several later versions of very successful totalizator systems installed at hundreds of tracks around the
world. Following the H200 system was one based on Digital PDP-8s, then Tandem systems, followed by
Digital PDP-11s and VAXs. In later years, both the Tandem systems and the VAX systems morphed into
statelotterysystems.
The Chicago Board of Trade
The Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT) is the world’s oldest
futures and options exchange. A wide variety of
commodities are traded via open outcry and electronic
trading.
In the 1960s, all trading was via open outcry. Traders stood
inpits,anoctagonalstructureof steps leadingto aflatfloor.
They indicated their intent to buy or sell at specified prices
by hand signals and yelling. When two traders agreed to
make a trade, they pointed at each other. Each wrote the
trade on a slip of paper and threw it into the center of the
pit.
Clerks gathered the trade slips from the floor of the pit and put them on conveyer belts. The first stations
that the conveyer belts passed were Morse-code operators who tapped out the trade to men walking
around a massive raised chalk board. These men listened to the Morse-encoded trades and wrote the
trades on the chalk board for the trading room to see. From the Morse code operator stations, the slips
thenmovedtoabackroomforafter-hourssettlement.
This system came to an end after railroads stopped using Morse code to signal between stations. This
waswhenthesourceofMorse-code-trainedoperatorsbegantodryup.
The CBOT decided to install Ferranti display boards to replace the old chalk boards. These were
mechanical displays that used rotating numerical drums to display trade prices. “Pulpits” were placed at
the edge of each pit, and operators observing the pit activity entered the trades into terminals in the
pulpits. These messages were sent to a PDP-8 that controlled the Ferranti display boards. The terminals
printed a hard copy of all trade activity. Slips were still used. They were gathered and sent to the back
officefortradesettlement.
Three PDP-8s were used. One was engaged in active trade reporting, and the others were standbys.
Eachwasan8Kmachine(16K6-bitcharacters).
5
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Much of the open outcry trading has since been replaced with electronic trading. However, open outcry
tradinginthepitsisstillinusebytheCBOT.
Summary
Inour current hightechnology, it is difficulttoseehow complex,real-timesystemsrequiring
continuous availability could be built with only a few thousand bytes of memory and with
clock speeds measured in the megahertz range. These case studies reflect the brilliance of
early computer professionals, who built major systems with such minimum resources – a
brilliancethathasledtotoday’splethoraofcomputingcapabilities.
6
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com