Worsing on Worsening
February2009
Ever since the first removal of a moth from the relay contacts of the Mark II computer in 1947,
bugs have plagued computing. The search for high availability in computing systems is markedly
historic. Over four decades ago, in a 1967 scolding given by Dr. R. A. Worsing, director of
Boeing’s computer center, to IBM Field Service management, he forciblyattacked what was then
thecurrentstateofsystemavailability.
Although at the time he would have been happy with a downtime of 2 hours per day (one 9 of
availability), many of his observations hold today. We have improved availability in our industry-
standard servers by a factor of one hundred (one 9 to three 9s). However, processor speeds
haveincreasedbyafactorofthousands.Onetellingcommentofhis:
”I'mstilluneasilysuspiciousthat,tothemanufacturers,abettercomputerisafasterCPU.”
Thehistoryofavailabilityimprovementlendscredencetothatstatementtoday.
Dr. Worsing’s speech is fascinating and entertaining reading for anyone involved in availability
and system support. In fact, legend has it that for many years UNIVAC required all product
developmentmanagerstoreadthisspeechyearlyandtosignanannualdeclarationthattheyhad
readit.
SPEECH TO IBM FIELD ENGINEERING
BRANCH MANAGERS1
July 31, 1967
Dr. R. A. Worsing,
Director
Systems Administration and Computing Department
THE BOEING COMPANY
My first reaction on receiving an invitation to speak to you this afternoon was one of sheer
incredulity. The few of you who know me well do not, I suspect, regard me as one of your more
congenial acquaintances. "Haven't they had enough of me?" I asked myself. "They must be
gluttonsforpunishment."
But being an eternal optimist, I came around to the point of view that at last my preaching,
cajoling, threatening and pleading had begun to bear fruit. It will be the first time; but if I can get
mymessageacross,itmightnotbethelast.
1ThankstoColinButcherofXDeltaLimitedforpointingmetoDr.Worsing’sspeech.Hiscompletespeechcanbefoundat
http://www.cs.brandeis.edu/~dkw/Worsing.txt.
1
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

SoI am actingupontheassumption that you arenotexpecting anybouquets this afternoon. This
is serious business. The problem, so eloquently portrayed by the movie you have just seen, is
bigger than both of us. Boeing is not a university, it is not an insurance company. Boeing,
because of its size and the urgency of its business, has no trivial problems. It is a problem
amplifier,ifyoulike.Wheneveranythinggoeswrong,itgoeswrongbadly.
NowtheareaofcomputingthatmypeopleandIaremostremotefromispreciselytheareaunder
discussion today. I have a lot of programmers working for me, and they think they understand
software. My hardware people understand logical design and circuitry. But we have no one
conversant with the problem ofmaintenance. Consequently, this is the area we leastunderstand;
and when you don't understand, you become frustrated. I say this to give you some
understanding of the problem of being the manager of the computing department in one of the
world'slargestandmostrapidlygrowingusersofcomputers.
ThematerialthatIdrawuponformypurposestodayhasbeengleanedoverten yearsasavictim
ofoutrageoushardware.I'verunthegamutfrompartuserofa701tomanagerofa$25million-a-
year installation. Today, I have at least one of almost everything that IBM has ever invented. I
suppose God has chosen to punish me here on Earth. For some reason, He just can't wait. The
consequentbaptismbyfireputsmeinanunequalledpositiontoaddressyoutodayonthesubject
ofCustomerEngineering.
On Customer Engineers
Carl suggested five subtitles to which I might address myself that he felt would be of significant
interest to you. I am following his advice and will therefore begin by attempting to answer the
question: What do I expect of customer engineers? Well, there's a one-word answer to that -
perfection.Iexpectthemachinestowork twenty-twohoursaday.That'ssimpleenough.Giveme
a100%reliablemachine,andIwillbehappy.Allowonebittoreverseitselfinthemiddleofatwo-
hour run, and I'll be a very unhappy man. It's simple, homespun philosophy, attained by bitter
experience.
Ifthissoundsunreasonabletoyou,considerthefollowing.Whatwouldyouthink ofanautomobile
that, despite a thorough daily overhaul, broke down with 15% probability every day? This is what
my grandfather did expect and lived his life accordingly. However, had his generation found this
state of affairs tolerable, our generation would have been in the same boat still today. They
simplyadoptedtheWorsingdictum:Youcan'tabuse allthepeopleallthetime.Theyfinallycatch
upwithyou,andyouchangeyourwaysorperish.
Again, how many of you would board a 707 that, despite two hours of preventive maintenance
every day, had a probability amounting to certainty that it would require airborne maintenance at
least once between midnight and morning on succeeding Sundays? Or that you would have to
board the airplane twice a dayeverydayfor a week or amonthto besure of gettingfrom Seattle
toNewYorkonce?
Let me develop this idea by putting into Boeing's mouth the kinds of repartee that I get subjected
to. In this way, you might understand more readily and be more sympathetic to mycause. Now I
regard a mainframe, the card readers, printers, tapes, discs, drums, telephone wires, modems
andremoteI/Ounitsasasinglesystem.Ifanydeviceisdown,theentiresystem isdown.There's
nosuchthing yetas"partlydown.”Computersarebinary,aren'tthey?Thismeanstheyareeither
workingperfectlyor theyaren't workingat all.Whatcomfortis ittotheprogrammer tobetoldthat
his program almost ran; and had it not been for a loose connection on chassis five, he wouldn't
havebeenhereatthreeinthemorning?Nowlet'schangeroles.
2
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

"Take courage,Widow Robinson, it was onlythe engines that conked out. The body and
wings were in perfect shape. Anyway, we don't make engines; so it wasn't really our
fault."
"Members of the Inquiry Board, the plane behaved perfectly all week. Just a loose
connection with the main fuel tank in the middle of the Indian Ocean for three minutes. It
hadpassedallthepre-flightdiagnostics."
"Of course, we don't guarantee a thing. If you want to be absolutely certain of getting
from New York to London, you'd better send three together and transfer the passengers
inmid-flightasnecessary."
"Ladies and gentlemen, we request your patience at this time. It should only have taken
twenty minutes to change wings. However, owing to an absolutely unthinkable and
unforeseen problem, we can't get the new ones on properly. If you would kindly
disembark, you will be taken to the passenger lounge, where complimentary instant
coffeewillbeserved."
"Ladies andgentlemen,owingtoanutterlymystifyingseriesofevents,ourstock ofspare
hub caps has been found to be exhausted. However, a spare is being flown in from
Karachi on Thursday. We do want you to know that this sort of thing doesn't usually
happen because we maintain stock levels that are based on years of experience. We
know you find this comforting and hope you will find your enforced sojourn in Thule to be
anunexpectedpleasure."
Well, whyis this so ridiculous?Whydo you expect so muchmore reliability with an airplane than
withacomputer?Theyaren'tanymoreexpensive.Theyaremuchmoredifficulttopilot.Theyare
notkeptinaspecialenvironment.
I say that the only reason is that airplane customers regard degrees of reliability as unthinkable,
whilecomputercustomersdonot.
And the reason why they don't is that they've been knocked on the head so often, they are
incapable of clear thought on the matter. Well, my head is made of concrete; and my vision is
quiteclear.Itisjustasintolerabletoallowthecollectionofgadgets wecallacomputertoadmitof
unreliabilityasitistoallowthecollectionofdeviceswecallanairplanetoadmitofunreliability.
Sotorepeatmyself,Iexpectfromyousimply-perfection!
Anticipating the howls of protest, I want to bring out the following point. It is a point that is not
commoncurrencyandone which youmaynotrecognizeor agreewithbecause youaretooclose
to the situation. It is this: The relationship between the field and the plant is not conductive to
satisfactory performance. To put it more plainly, you are not being supported properly by your
people back at the plant. And while I regard you as partly responsible for this, I really think that
thepeoplebackattheranch-Poughkeepsie,Boulder,etc.-aremainlytoblame.
As far as I am concerned, you are the people responsible for reliability. I can't afford to take any
other point of view. When the machine is down, you are to blame. But, privately, I recognize the
fact that you can't make a silk purse out of a sow's ear; and if Headquarters is in the pork
business instead of the silkworm business, then you don't stand much of a chance. Privately, I
recognize the fact that reliability is a function of good design, manufacturing excellence, quality
control, etc. However, you will never get me to admit that on Boeing territory, precisely because I
cannot allow myself to get into the position of holding more than one person responsible for
reliabilityorforanythingelseforthatmatter.
3
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

I have to force the system to work. I refuse to crutch it by going directly to your Engineering or
Manufacturing people. Anyway, your company won't let me. So I go to you, and I demand
perfection. It is, in turn, your responsibility to see to it that the machinery you service is designed
and fabricated properly. It is this step that I find lacking. My experience has indicated to me that
thereisaverypoorrelationshipbetweenhomebaseandthecolonies.
I don't say that Headquarters doesn't get to hear from you. You wrap every defective part in a
pre-addressed box and ship it into the wild blue yonder. From a statistical point of view,
Headquarters knows what's goingonquiteaccurately. Idon'tdoubtthat.WhatIdodoubt aretwo
things, namelythat you receive anything back from them in the wayof insight, visibility, statistics,
etc., and that they receive anything from you in the way of semantics. By the latter, I mean, for
example,theyreceive adefectivefive-centconsoletypewriter connector - justlikeI'm wearingon
my tie clip - and they say, "This makes only 943 defective five-cent connectors this week. We're
down 7% on last week. Keep up the good work, lads."What they don't receive is the information
thathascaused:
a. theentiresystemtobeunavailableforfourhoursatthecostof$2,000;
b. thererunningofatwo-hourjobfor$1,000;
c. thedelayofallscheduledworktothefactorythatday,causingdelaysinthefactoryatthe
costof$200,000.
How often have you ever told that to the factory? How much vinegar do you pour into the pipe-
line? Statistics, unaccompanied by semantics, are a cold and lifeless thing; and your job is to
breathe the breath of life into your reports to awaken the Rip Van Winkles back home. In the
meantime,myjobistorendereveryassistanceIcanbypointingoutyourshortcomings.
On Reliability and Availability
The second subtitle concerns itself with the importance of system reliability and availability.
Obviously, the foregoing was inextricably mixed with this subject because, really, what I expect
from Field Engineering is precisely that product reliability and availability. However, there is a bit
moretobetold.
Firstly, I want to restate the fact that Boeing is committed to computers. There's no wayback. As
computersbecameavailable,andaswelearnedhowtousethem,weslowlyhitchedourselvesto
their tremendous power. But we didn't just replace the machines. Rather, we started doing our
business in new ways. We began to get used to expecting new kinds of service. New
relationships got under way. And all this novelty was characterized by orders of magnitude of
difference in volumes of information, timeliness of information, and reliability of information - both
on the scientific and the commercial side. We can now do stress analysis using so many points
thatsquadsofpeoplewouldtakelifetimesbyhandtocarryitout,andwecandothisovernight.
We process all the paperwork that the factory needs to bring the parts to the right places at the
righttimes,overnight.Theorders for thedayareouttothetroops beforethetroops comeaboard
every single day. And the orders are accurate. The size of our final assembly operations
absolutelyprecludesthepossibilityofdoingthisbyhand.Ifweweremakingoneproductwithlittle
change, it wouldn't be such a problem; and everything would be part of a routine cycle. But just
abouteveryairplaneisdifferentfromitsneighbor.Wedon'tmassproduce,wecustom-build.
Now the great coincidence - a coincidence that is largely not understood, even by many of our
people - is that computers became available just when they were wanted. You see, you can't do
the stress analysis of a 707, 747, or SST, without a computer; and you can't have a customer-
orientedassemblylinewithoutoneeither.
4
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Without the computer, airplane development would have come to a halt. Neither can you have a
space program or build thermonuclear devices. This, I think, is a fundamental fact of modern life
largely overlooked by most people, including, I regret to say, the computer manufacturers
themselves. That's why the sales talk still stresses people-replacement and economy of the old
thinginsteadofcapabilityforthenewthing.
So you see, there's no going back. We are committed. In order to build airplanes you need
people,buildings,tools,materials–andcomputers.Andtoweldtheseattributesintoaviableunit,
you must plan and manage that plan; and this entails commitment. And to commit a computer is
tostate,categorically,thatitshallfunction.
Ihopeyoufindthisasimplemessage.
Secondly, I want to take up cudgels with your criteria. I want to discuss, for a moment, how you
shouldbemeasuredandhowyoushould bereported.Whatisavailability?
Each week at our IBM-Boeing Review Meeting, and each month at our meeting with Buck
Rodgers,2 we discuss theincidents of downtime,how long devices were down, what went wrong,
how you located the trouble, what you did to fix it, and what you are going to do to prevent it
recurring. All of this is necessary, useful activity; but it stops a shade short of reality. The quality
of your work is displayed in terms of graphs showing "availability" - and I say this in quotes - and
