Commerzbank Survives 9/11 with OpenVMS Clusters
July2009
On September 11, 2001, the World Trade Center was destroyed
when two airliners piloted by terrorists crashed into the twin towers.
The New York offices of Commerzbank, a major German bank, were
only 100 yards away on the 31st to 34th floors of 2 World Financial Center. Though the bank’s
data center physically survived the terrorist attack, the intense dust and heat caused most of its
systems to crash. To complicate matters, all communication with the outside world was lost,
potentiallybringingitsU.S.businesstoahalt.
However, Commerzbank had the foresight to distribute its processing with an OpenVMS
Active/Active Split-Site Cluster. Its processing services continued uninterrupted in its alternate
location thirty miles away, allowing it to continue to provide seamless service following the
terroristattack.
Commerzbank
Commerzbank (www.commerzbank.com) has a long and varied history. It was established in
1870inHamburg,Germany,tofacilitateoverseastradeforHamburg.ItsurvivedWorldWarIand
continued to grow by merger and
acquisition during the inflation years
triggered by the Versailles treaty, which
laid the groundwork for the growth and
eventual takeover of German life by the
NationalSocialistParty.
Bank-notebandfromtheinflationyears,circa1922
Following WorldWar II, Commerzbank lost the 45% of its locations that were in the Soviet zone.
However, it continued to build a national network of branches and began its international
expansion. It opened its first New York branch in 1971 – the first German bank branch in the
United States. Opening further U.S. branches in Los Angeles, Chicago, and Atlanta, its U.S.
branches focused on commercial and investment banking. Today, Commerzbank North America
is a wholesale bank that serves approximately 500 customers, many of whom are Fortune 500
companies. Commerzbank now has branches in major business and financial centers in over
fortycountries.
Commerzbank has grown to be Germany’s second largest bank. With headquarters now in
Frankfurt,Ithas36,000employees,8,000ofwhomareoutsideofGermany.Itprovidesin-branch,
telephone, and online financial services to individuals, small to medium-sized businesses, and
largemultinationalcompanies.With1,200branches,it services 5.7millionretailclients andhas a
stated objective to establish itself as the number one bank for Germany’s small to medium-sized
1
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

businesses. Through a subsidiary, it is now Germany’s largest online broker. True to its roots, it
finances16%ofGermany’sforeigntrade.
Commerzbank’s Quest for Zero Downtime
While most large organizations today have plans for disaster recovery and in many cases for
disaster tolerance (i.e., users will be unaware of a site disaster), few have had to put these plans
to a real-life test. But on September 11, 2001, Commerzbank’s critical processing systems were
tested when its primary North-American data center near the World Trade Center was put out of
commission after the twin towers collapsed following a terrorist attack. Because of astute
foresight, Commerzbank was able to continue its North American operations in its data center
thirtymilesaway.
Commerzbank’s stated goal is for zero downtime in any of its critical IT production systems.This
imperative means that there must be redundancy of data and processing at more than one
locationandwithrapidfailover.
To achieve this goal, the bank runs its critical systems on HP’s OpenVMS Split-Site Cluster.
Commerzbank uses OpenVMS servers in a cluster configuration at two locations – 2 World
Financial Center across the West Side Highway from the World Trade Center in New York City
(its primary data center) and in Rye, New York, thirty miles away (its remote data center). The
remotedatacenterinRyeisthecontingencysitefordisastertoleranceandisusedduringnormal
times for development, testing, and training. Its databases are kept in real-time synchronization
with those at the primary site so that it is immediately available to take over processing with no
lossofdataintheeventofaprimarysitefailure.
OpenVMS Clusters1 are active/active systems that allow applications to run simultaneously on
multiple nodes. The geographically-distributed databases (shadow sets) at the various nodes are
kept synchronized via synchronous replication using distributed lock and cache management (a
technologycalledHost-BasedVolumeShadowing,or HBVS).Shoulda nodein a datacenter fail,
or should an entire data center be taken down, user requests are simply rerouted to a surviving
nodeordatacenter.Failovercanbeaccomplishedinseconds.
Critical applications entrusted to the OpenVMS clusters include a money-transfer system
responsible for the bank’s connection to the Federal Reserve and the New York Clearing House,
a trading system, a banking system that handles international banking requirements, a letter-of-
creditsystem,andafuturesandoptionssystem.
The OpenVMS Cluster Configuration - 2001
To ensure constant uptime, the bank at the time of the 9/11 attacks ran one AlphaServer GS160
system at its primary site in downtown Manhattan and one such server in its remote location in
Rye. Storage was provided via StorageWorks systems to store two terabytes of data utilizing
RAID0,RAID1,andRAID5technologiesinaSAN(storage-areanetwork)environment.
At the remote site was a pair of AlphaServer 4100 servers that were logically part of the primary
cluster. Their role was to connect the remote drives to the primary cluster node using fibre-
channel links. All disk drives at both the primarysite and the remote site were volume shadowed
so that changes made to any database at the primary site were synchronously replicated to the
remotesite.
Asaresultofthiswide-areaclustering,theapplicationdatabaseswerealwaysavailableandwere
updatedinrealtime.
1
OpenVMSActive/ActiveSplit-SiteClusters,AvailabilityDigest;June2008.
2
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Surviving the Meltdown2
When the first jet hit, Commerzbank’sWorld Financial Center facilitylost its communications with
the Federal Reserve and the New York Clearing House. A staff member switched the links to the
remotesite,andconnectionbetweentheprimarysiteandtheseorganizationswasrestored.
Operations proceeded normally until the second jet hit. At this point, the 400 employees at the
primarysiteevacuatedthebuilding.
The primary site was heavily protected with environmental contingency, including its own
generator, fuel tank, cooling tower, uninterrupted power supply, battery-backup system, fire
suppression, as well as extra CPUs and disk drives. As a result, when the World Trade Center
lost power, the generator and cooling system kicked in so that all systems continued in operation
initially. However, dust and debris from the collapse of the towers caused the air-conditioning
unitstofail;andtemperaturesrosedramatically.
Because of the intense heat in the building, which climbed to 104º F, all of the systems in the
data center crashed except for the clustered AlphaServer, which managed to keep running all of
its partitions but one. The disk SANs crashed, but the primary AlphaServer used the fibre-
connected SANs at the remote site. The critical money-transfer system never went down and
continuedtooperateattheprimarysitefortherestoftheday.
Commerzbank’s main challenge at this point was to get its employees to the remote data center
in Rye. This was in the face of the closure of the New York City subways, trains, and bridges.
However, though there were 400 employees stationed in the primary data center,
Commerzbank’scontingencyplanallowedtheremotesitetobetemporarilyoperatedfortwodays
with only ten people. It was able to get sixteen people to Rye the first day, and the remainder of
theemployeesarrivedoverthenextfewdaysastransportationbecameavailable.
Compaq (now HP) offered whatever help Commerzbank needed, including emergency extra
hardware.Butbecauseofitsremotesite,Commerzbankneedednosuchhelp.
For the next eight months, about two-thirds of the bank’s employees worked in Rye; and the
remainder worked at a subsidiary in Midtown Manhattan. The primary facility was available for
reoccupancyinmid-May,2002.
The Power of a Contingency Plan
Commerzbank’s experience during this disaster clearly reflects the power of proper contingency
planning. The bank’s disaster tolerance environment is only part of a much larger business-
continuity plan. Not only does the bank test its contingency procedures with business users on a
regular basis, but it has a call tree to make sure that everyone is on board with the situation
duringanemergency.
Frequent testing of its contingency procedures is possible because of the active/active capability
of the OpenVMS Cluster. Users can be switched rapidly and reliably to the backup system with
littleconcernaboutexperiencingafailoverfault.
2MaterialforthiscasestudywastakenfromtheOpenVMScasestudy,HPAlphaServertechnologyhelpsCommerzbank
toleratedisasteronSeptember11,http://h71000.www7.hp.com/openvms/brochures/commerzbank.
3
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Summary
Commerzbank’s continued operation in the face of the 9/11 disaster is a testament to the power
of active/active systems. Though in its case, only the disk systems were run in an active/active
mode, the provision of a synchronized remote database allowed the bank to rapidly switch users
fromthefailedprimarydatacentertotheremotedatacenter.
This same capability allowed the bank to frequently test its disaster-tolerance contingency plan.
Too often, companies avoid testing failover to a redundant system because of the extended
downtime imposed on users during failover and the risk of a failover fault because the backup
system’senvironmentdoesnotmatchthatoftheprimarysystem.
With active/active configurations, failover can be done in seconds. Furthermore, it is always
known that all nodes are operational because they are in service (even if one is idle in
contingency mode). Testing can be done frequently and with little risk to ensure that when a
disasterhappens,contingencyworks.
4
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com