The IPv4 Doomsday
August2009
Remember the Year 2000 Doomsday? As it turned out, we survived that one well. Though
potentially a worldwide disaster, the Y2K problem only affected individual systems; and massive
effortsbysystemdevelopersavoidedmostproblems.
But what if instead the problem had affected the entire Internet? Not only might these individual
systems have been taken down, but all systems except those few that lived in isolation might
havebeenlost.WithouttheInternet,muchoftoday’sglobalcommercewouldcometoahalt.
Well, we are facing just that problem. The issue is the Internet Protocol (IP) that interconnects
systems and users all over the world via a global packet-switching network. The current version
of IP, Version 4, known as IPv4, has an address space that seemed inexhaustible when the
Internetwasfirstbeingspecified.Afterall,IPv4useda32-bitaddressfieldthatprovidedoverfour
billion uniqueaddresses. Sincethereare about 6.7billionpeople on theearth,this would provide
an Internet address for more than half of all men, women and children around the globe. This
shouldbeenough,right?Wrong!
Various estimates now indicate that the IPv4 address space will be exhausted in the next two
years or so. What now? The planned answer is a massively extended address space that is
made available in the next version of IP, IPv6. But is IPv6 readyfor prime time? Let’s look at this
issue.
What Happened to IPv4?
IPv4 was the fourth version of the Internet Protocol and was introduced in 1981.1 Growing out of
the ARPANET (Advanced Research Projects Agency Network), a joint venture of the U.S.
Department of Defense and several universities and laboratories, the primary use of the Internet
was expected to be for the exchange of scientific papers and studies for academia (a related
network,theMILNET,servedthemilitary’sneeds).
The Internet was opened to commercial use in 1989.2 At the same time, Tim Berners-Lee
introduced his new invention, the World Wide Web.3,4 No longer was the Internet used only by
academic and government users. It was now useful for everybody on the planet Earth. It is
estimatedthatin2009,25%oftheworld’spopulationisusingInternetservices.Thataccountsfor
1IPv4,Wikipedia.
2Internet,Wikipedia.
3WorldWideWeb,Wikipedia.
4Interestingly, Tim Berners-Leearguedagainst thesupport of graphics ontheWeb,sayingthat it wouldbogdownthe
Internet with its high bandwidth demands. Fortunately, he lost that argument. Isn’t the rapid advance of technology
wonderful?
1
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

half of all Internet addresses in the IPv4 address space (assuming that all users have their own
Internetaddress,whichisprobablynotquitetrue).
Furthermore, the number of users of the Internet appears to be doubling every year. This dooms
IPv4sometimeinthenextyearorso.
Doomsday Predictions
ThereareanumberofeffortstopredictwhentheIPv4addressspacewillbeexhaustedbasedon
the current rates of deployment. In 2003, it was estimated that the address space would be
suitablefortwodecades.In2005,Ciscopredictedthattheaddressspacewoulddryupby2009.5
Hurricane Electric, an Internet backbone provider,
Global IPv4 & IPv6 Statistics
has introduced an iPhone application that counts
down the number of days to exhaustion.6 On
IPv4Addresses: IPv4/8sUnused:
Wednesday, July 22, the count was 699 days. A 462,586,433 11%(30/256)
similar estimate by Asia-Pacific Network Information
IPv6ReadyASNs: IPv6ReadyTLDs:
Centre (APNIC) was surprisingly close, at 701 days. 4%(1,483/31,944) 78%(219/280)
Thisputsexhaustiondayinearlytomid-2011.
IPv6Nameservers: IPv6Domains:
1,200 741,357
These estimates are all based on the current rate of
699
IP address assignments. Of course, if there should
be a “land rush” for the last addresses, the address
exhaustioncouldcomesomewhatearlier.
daysUntilExhaustion
IPv6 to the Rescue – Maybe
In response to this problem, the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) released the
specifications for Version 6 of the IP protocol, IPv6, in late 1999.7 IPv6 quadruples the size of the
IP address field from 32 bits to 128 bits. This increases the IP address space from four billion
(4x109) addresses to 3.4x1038 addresses (a googolplex, or a 1 followed by a googol of zeros – a
term coined by a nine-year old in 19388). This is enough addresses to assign almost five
quintillion addresses (1015 – almost a googolplex) to every observable star in the known
universe!9
Is this enough?Wewould certainlyhopeso.However,theintentincreatingsuch alargeaddress
space was not to combat address exhaustion but rather to make the assignment of addresses
muchmore flexible. The current IPv4 32-bit address uses the first one to three octets (an octet is
network-speak for an eight-bit number) to specify a network address and the remaining octets to
specify a subnet and host address according to a subnet mask.10 The expanded IPv6 address,
with 64 bits for each, provides a sparsely-filled address space that will allow a better systematic
andhierarchicalallocationofaddresses.
How complex is the transition from IPv4 to IPv6? It is not trivial. Not only are the protocol stacks
different, but the packet headers are different. In addition, IPv6 requires the Internet Protocol
Security (IPsec), which is optional in IPv4, to be supported. Furthermore, IPv6 routers no longer
do fragmentation. It is up to the host to query the route to determine the maximum transmission
5TonyHain,APragmaticReportonIPv4AddressSpaceConsumption,TheInternetProtocolJournal;September,2005.
6StephenLawson, iPhoneapppredictsIPv4doomsday,Infoworld;July22,2009.
7 The new IP version could not be named Version 5 since this version number had been assignedto an experimental
streamingprotocoltosupportvideoandaudio.
8Googolplex,Wikipedia.
9IPv6,Wikipedia.
10W.RichardStevens,pg.8,TCP/IPIllustrated,Volume1:TheProtocols,Addison-Wesley;1994.
2
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

unit(MTU)andtofragmentitsmessagesintopacketsizesthatarenolargerthan theMTU.Four-
gigabytejumbo-sizedpackets,calledjumbograms,canbetransmittedviaIPv6ifthelinkallows.
Fortunately, IPv6 allows IPv4 addresses to be encapsulated in IPv6 addresses. The four-octet
IPv4address occupies the low-order four octets of theIPv6address,withtheupper twelveoctets
settoadefinedvalue.
Transition Help
For a while, IPv4 and IPv6 networks will coexist. How long is a while? How long have flat files
coexisted with SQL tables? How long have COBOL applications coexisted with C++ or Java
applications?
Whilethesenetworkscoexist,severalmechanismswillbeavailabletoprovideinteroperability.
 Dual-Stack IP Implementations: IPv6 is, in fact, an extension of IPv4. Therefore, it is
straightforwardtowriteadualprotocolstackthatsupportsbothIPv4andIPv6whileusing
a great deal of common code. Most IPv6 stack implementations today provide a dual
stack.
 Address Mapping: IPv4 addresses can be mapped to IPv6 addresses. Mapping is
accomplished by setting the first 80 bits of the IPv6 address to zero and the next 16 bits
toone.Theremaining32bits holdtheIPv4 address. WhenopeninganIPv6socket,IPv4
addresseswillappearasappropriately-mappedIPv6addresses.
 IPv4 to IPv6 - Tunneling: An IPv4 host or network can reach the IPv6 Internet by
encapsulatingIPv6packetswithinanIPv4packet.ThisistheIPv4protocol41.
 IPv6 to IPv4 - Header Translation: This is still an area of concern. How can a new IPv6
host talk to a legacy IPv4 host? One way is to use a dual-stack application-layer proxy
such as a web proxy. IPv6 traffic is sent to the proxy, which will retransmit it over IPv4 to
itsdestination.
How Is IPv6 Deployment Going?
Not well. Even though IPv6 has been around for a decade, there are many impediments to its
adaption.Theseimpedimentsinclude:
 networks that use equipment obtained from manufacturers that have since gone out of
business.
 manufacturersthatrefusetoprovideIPv6upgradesorthatchargeexcessivelyforthem.
 IPstacksinROMthatcannotbeupgraded.
 insufficientmemoryinrouterstoimplementtheIPv6stack.
 performanceproblemsinolderrouterscausedbyIPv6.
Inaddition,
 ManufacturersmustprovidenewequipmentwithsufficientresourcesforIPv6.
 ManufacturersmustinvestindevelopingnewsoftwareforIPv6support.
 EndusersmustbeeducatedinissuesconcerningIPv4obsolescence.
 Endusersmustbeeducatedtoupgradetheircurrentequipment.
 ISPsmustinvesttechnicalresourcestoupgradetheirnetworksforIPv6.
3
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Most manufacturers have been responsive to the need to support IPv6. Most servers, routers,
and operating systems marketed today support IPv6. However, the other issues still stand in the
wayofwide-spreadadoptionofIPv6.
A 2008 study by Google11 found that less than 1% of Internet-enabled hosts used IPv6. The
leader was Russia, with 0.76%. The U.S. had a penetration of 0.45%. The Mac OS X operating
system ledalloperatingsystemswithapenetrationof2.44%.Linuxfollowedwithapenetrationof
0.93%. Windows Vista had a penetration of 0.32%. None of these numbers bode well for an
explosionofuseofIPv6inthenextcoupleofyears.
ThoughChinatrailed witha penetrationof 0.24%, itmaybethefurthestahead.Allof thenetwork
operations for the 2008 Summer Olympic Games held in Beijing were conducted using IPv6.
ChinamustmakeacommitmenttoIPv6.WhiletheU.S.hasgobbledupone-thirdoftheavailable
IPv4 addresses (over one billion addresses for 300 million people), China has more high-speed
Internetusersthanassignedaddresses.TherapidadoptionofIPv6isitspathtoInternetstability.
Summary
Wewill survivethis transitionas we didthe Y2Kcrisis,though itmaybe painful. Daniel Bernstein
wrote a paper in 2002 entitled the “The IP Mess” in which he criticized what he considered to be
fundamentaldesignflaws inIPv6.Oneofhis points wasthattheIPv6specificationdidnothavea
transition plan. We maybe painfully aware of this in the next few years when new hosts that can
onlyobtainanIPv6addressmustworkovertheIPv4Internet.
Thisisnotthelastdoomsdaywewillface.We’vejustgonethroughacoupleofthem.12TheY2K7
bug confused manysystems when the dates of Daylight Savings Time were changed in the U.S.
in 2007 – an impact that is still felt today in systems that automatically adjust for this time
change.13
TheZ2K9bugdisabledallof Microsoft’s 30-gigabyte ZuneMP3players whenthe2008 leap year
endedatmidnight,December31,2008.
Up and coming is the Y2K38 bug. Unix systems storing date/time as a 32-bit signed integer will
rollovertozero.
But there is no problem with doomsdays of the future. As long as it won’t happen on our watch –
as long as we will have been retired for a while when it comes – don’t take it out of our budget.
Leave itfor thenextguyto figureout.That’s how wehandled the Y2K doomsday, and that’s how
we’rehandlingtheIPv4doomsday.Afterall,that’stheI.T.way.
11S.H.Gunderson,GlobalIPv6Statistics–MeasuringthecurrentstateofIPv6forordinaryusers,GoogleWhitePaper;
October,2008.
12 J. Di Giacomo, What Time Is It In Your Test Bed?, www.tandsoft.com (to be published in The Connection;
September/October,2009).
4
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com