– Our August Twitter Feed of Outages
August 2017
A challenge every issue for the Availability Digest is to determine which of the many
availability topics out there win coveted status as Digest articles. We always regret not
focusing our attention on the topics we bypass. With our new Twitter presence, we don’t
have to feel guilty. This article highlights some of the tweets that made headlines in
recent days.
The Dutch have solutions to rising seas. The world is watching.
In the waterlogged Netherlands, climate change is considered neither a hypothetical nor a drag on
the economy. Instead, it’s viewed as an opportunity.
https://t.co/CaqBswfyMA
“Baseload”: An outdated term that should not be confused with “reliability”
The “coal versus no new coal” debate has come to define the battle lines over Australia’s energy
future. It can basically be boiled down to one concept: the assumption that we have to rely on
baseload power for the reliability and security of our electricity supply. A new report from the US
highlights how the concept of “baseload” is really just an artefact of an old industry and points out
that baseload should not be confused with reliability. The two do not go hand in hand, and hanging
on to the term is getting in the way of planning for the future.
https://t.co/Z4BwwL07Xe
The Seven Deadly Sins of BDR
Many businesses think they have a proper business continuity plan in place but may be falling victim
to one or more of seven deadly BDR (Backup and Disaster Recovery) sins that can cause significant
problems when disaster strikes and data needs to be recovered.
https://t.co/nFKxaUogpQ
From the Availability Digest - "Carbonite – The Online File Copy Utility"
The online copy service used by Dr. Bill Highleyman is Carbonite (www.carbonite.com). “Carbonite
has saved me on many occasions. There have been times when I have accidentally deleted a file
and couldn’t restore it. At other times, I have corrupted a file by removing records inappropriately or
by modifying records with garbage. In all of these cases, I was able to go to Carbonite and retrieve a
good copy of the file. All I had to do was to view the list of files stored online by Carbonite, click on it,
and click ‘Restore.’” Another feature of Carbonite lets you restore all files.
http://bit.ly/2s6pkag
1
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

R3's Corda enters beta, partners with HP Enterprise
Distributed ledger technology builder R3 has announced the public beta of Corda this week as well
as a partnership with HP Enterprise (HPE). HPE demonstrated Corda running on the HPE Integrity
NonStop Platform. Proving deployment of Corda on HPE's NonStop platform, on which so many of
the world's most trusted companies run their most important applications, is a major step forward, R3
said in statement.
https://t.co/2oD8cc062i
Brooklyn’s Latest Craze: Making Your Own Electric Grid
When Michael Guerra, a blunt-talking Brooklyn real estate broker, installed 24 solar panels on his
Park Slope rooftop in 2012 during a home renovation, all he knew was that he liked the idea of being
able to supply his own green electricity and to run his air conditioning in the summer without paying
exorbitant charges. So he got as many panels as his utility and the state would allow. Then one day
in 2016, he got a knock on his door. A man asked him if would like to join a microgrid that would
permit renewable energy users like Guerra to sell power directly to their neighbors.
https://t.co/JWstORYveu
It’s not just you: CNN, New York Times, Reddit, and other sites are all down
A strange outage struck a number of extremely popular websites on 28 June, bringing The New York
Times, CNN, Reddit, Pinterest, Etsy, and Amazon to their knees in many areas of the United States.
The downtime slammed the coasts particularly hard, with huge numbers of reports coming in from
both the East Coast as well as Southern California. The issue appeared to be linked to the cloud
hosting service Fastly, which supports the backends of all these major web destinations, and was
dealing at the time with a “global event.”
https://t.co/fjmQStACtU
Massive cyberattack hits Europe with widespread ransom demands
A new wave of powerful cyberattacks hit Europe and beyond in late June in a possible reprise of a
widespread ransomware assault in May. Cyber researchers say that the virus, which was linked to
malware called Petrwrap or Petya, used a U.S. National Security Agency-developed “exploit” that
was later leaked onto the Internet by hackers. It is the second massive attack in the past two months
to turn powerful U.S. exploits against the IT infrastructure that supports national governments and
corporations.
https://t.co/9I2oiPG7Ew
Cyber attack hits oil giant and banks in Russia and Ukraine
Russia's top oil producer Rosneft said a large-scale cyberattack hit its servers in late June, and
computer systems at some banks and the main airport in neighboring Ukraine were also disrupted.
A Moscow-based cyber security firm, Group-IB, said it appeared to be a coordinated attack that
simultaneously targeted victims in Russia and Ukraine.
https://t.co/48SnZWt9pL
2
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

60K Spectrum Customers Lose Internet in Queens After Vandals Cut Fiber Optic Cable
About 60,000 Spectrum customers in Queens, New York, were without cable or internet recently
after vandals cut a fiber optic cable serving four major hubs. Spectrum was working to restore cable,
internet and phone services to thousands of customers more than 15 hours after vandals cut the
fiber optic cable.
https://t.co/ki0H7GRb5J
Know Your SLAs
The Service Level Agreement (SLA) is a contractual agreement between a service provider and
customer. It defines the expected level of service delivered by a service provider. The purpose of an
SLA is to specify and define what the customer will receive as part of the service. SLAs do not define
how the service itself is provided or delivered. The service implementations may change during the
term of the SLA.
https://t.co/D2BvhOpjtw
China turns on the world's largest floating solar farm
Recently, workers switched on a solar energy plant capable of producing 40 megawatts of power.
The plant floats on a manmade lake in China’s Anhui province near the city of Huainan. The array is
the largest floating solar project in the world; though at the brisk pace China is building new
renewable projects, it’s unlikely to hold that title very long.
https://t.co/Z8rUQFojUO
Legacy backup vs cloud data management
Nobody likes change, but sometimes change is necessary for improvement. Backup should be
simple, scalable and cost effective - things that are not always delivered simultaneously with legacy
solutions. Be brave and step into the unknown by embracing cloud data management and empower
your business to do more.
https://t.co/Yoj625NK79
The Convenient Connection Between Wall Street and Fat-Finger Trades
A fat-finger trade/error is a keyboard input error in the stock market or FX market whereby an
order to buy or sell is placed of far greater size than intended. That is it. Sounds simple, doesn't
it? However, rarely do fat-finger errors occur that cause the stock market to go nuts on the
upside. Fat-finger errors seem to be exclusively reserved to create a massive whoosh lower in a
particular stock, usually widely held, which helps take the overall markets down as well with it.
https://t.co/lWMeA1FjBK
Californians alerted to a powerful earthquake ... that took place 92 years ago
The U.S. State of California was sent into a panic on June 21st when the Los Angeles Times
reported that a powerful 6.8 earthquake had rocked the state. Such a quake did happen, but it
happened in 1925. An embarrassed LA Times was forced to admit that a robot, cheerily called
“Quakebot,” had both written and published the report by mistake.
https://t.co/DcCXGDqn9K
3
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Blackouts in Ukraine were just a trial run. Russian hackers are learning to sabotage
infrastructure
In Ukraine, the quintessential cyberwar scenario has come to life. Twice. On separate occasions,
invisible saboteurs have turned off the electricity to hundreds of thousands of people. Each blackout
lasted a matter of hours, only as long as it took for scrambling engineers to manually switch the
power on again. But as proofs of concept, the attacks set a new precedent: In Russia’s shadow, the
decades-old nightmare of hackers stopping the gears of modern society has become a reality.
https://t.co/3ntI7c2Wq1
Hardware issue causes digital banking outage at PNC
Customers at PNC Financial Services in late June were unable to access their online and mobile
banking accounts for several hours because of an unspecified issue with the company’s technology.
The outage is the latest in a string of recent tech glitches affecting big banks across the industry.
https://t.co/BD2hbRBhQ4
Not all N 1 configurations are equal
Often lost in the noise of the debate is that all N+1 systems are not alike. This is important because
the right N+1 configuration can make a big difference in capital costs and deployment time. To the
uninitiated, N+1 is one of several approaches around planning and developing redundancy of
utilities, in this case, for IT systems such as data centres. It can be applied to several utilities, e.g.,
cooling. But in this article, it will be discussed as a power supply metric.
https://t.co/HzVYaQhzKY
NYC Looks to Make Its 911 System Fully Digital
New York City is working to make its 911 system fully digital, which in practical terms means that
residents will be able to interact with emergency responders through text messages, photos, videos,
social media and other state-of-the-art methods of communication.
https://t.co/GloPRF67Gj
Meeting Continuous Power Needs
Pacific Gas & Electric Co. (PG&E), one of the U.S.’ largest utilities, operates in a region where
outages are not tolerated. To minimize customer outages, particularly during periods of transmission
and distribution (T&D) infrastructure changes and upgrades, PG&E relies on mobile power
generation resources to inject power into those constrained sections of grid undergoing upgrades.
https://t.co/PmYukgm8Jb
Syria opens its first solar-powered hospital aiming to save more lives
Syria's electrical grid has taken a big hit after six years of a volatile civil war with most of the
electrical infrastructure bombed, dismantled or destroyed and leaving hospitals relying on diesel
generators but at the mercy of fuel shortages. So the Union of Medical Care and Relief
Organizations (UOSSM), an international coalition of international medical organizations and NGOs,
said it hoped the creation of the country's first solar-power hospital will save lives.
https://t.co/ncrhcrAVWu
4
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

The Race to Solar-Power Africa
Electrifying Africa is one of the largest development challenges on earth. There are about as many
people living without electricity today as there were when Thomas Edison lit his first light bulb. More
than half are in sub-Saharan Africa. Europe and the Americas are almost fully electrified, and Asia is
quickly catching up; but the absolute number of Africans without power remains steady.
https://t.co/s2TsV74Sht
Can Congress establish a backup for GPS before it's too late?
The U.S. Coast Guard Authorization Act is up for renewal in Congress, and a provision in the House
proposal requires the establishment of a backup for the Global Positioning System (GPS) called
“eLoran.” The proposal could help to end almost 20 years of back and forth between administrations
and Congress.
https://t.co/8FG96w0KfH
