Multifactor Authentication
September2015
Authentication is the process of verifying that a person is who he says he is. In today’s
online technology, authentication of a user is usually accomplished by requiring that he
logonto asystem with his user nameandpassword. However,usernames andpasswords canbestolen,
renderingthisformofauthenticationrisky.
Theuseof ausernameandpasswordis aform ofsingle-factor authentication.Onlyonefactor is required
– the knowledge of the password. The authentication process can be significantly strengthened by
requiringadditionalidentifications.Thisismultifactorauthentication.
What Is Multifactor Authentication
Multifactor authentication (MFA) requires two or three (or in some cases more) forms of identification.
Generally,twoorthreeofthefollowingformsofidentification(factors)arerequired:
 Somethingyouknow(knowledgefactor)
 Somethingyouhave(possessionfactor)
 Somethingyouare(inherencefactor)(biometrics)
Apasswordisaform ofaknowledgefactor.Your zipcodeornationalidentificationnumber(suchas your
SocialSecurityNumberintheU.S.)areotherformsofknowledgefactors.
Possessionfactors–somethingyouhave–couldbeanATMcard,acreditcard,aUSBstick,orakey.
Inherence factors are typically your biometrics.Themost common inherence factor is fingerprints. Others
mightberetinascans,voicecharacteristics,orfacialrecognition.
How Secure is Single-Factor Authentication
Typical single-factor authentication (SFA) requires a username and a password. Even though this
requires two items, they both belong to the same factor (knowledge) and therefore count as only one
factor.
Dowereallyneedmultifactorauthentication?Howsecurecansingle-factorauthenticationbe?
A key to the answer to this question is how strong is the password? Programs exist to determine a
passwordbybruteforce.Acomputertriesallpossiblecombinationsuntilitfindsthepasswordthatworks.
There is a website that will tell you how strong your password is. It is Random-ize and can be found at
http://random-ize.com/how-long-to-hack-pass/.SomeresultsareshowninTable1:
1
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

PasswordLength(characters)
6 8 10
Alphaonly 1second 1minute13seconds 13hours48minutes
Alphanumeric 1second 16minutes33 14days21hours
seconds
Allcharacters 34seconds 1day20hours 23years11months
TimetoBrute-ForceGuessaPassword
Table1
Clearly, the strength of the password can cover a broad range. The password “avdrtg” would take a
computer less than one second to guess. The password “avdrtg$73*” would take the same computer
almost 24 years to guess! The first password format has 3x108 combinations. The second password
formathas1x1018combinations–almosttenbillionmore.
Single-factor authentication using usernames and passwords is the most common form of SFA because
of its low cost, ease of implementation, and familiarity. No special hardware is needed. However, strong
passwords can be difficult to remember, and as a result people tend to use the same password for many
services. Hackers can infect systems and steal usernames and passwords, thus potentially gaining
access tomanyservices usedbyasingleperson.Onceapassword is stolen,it makes nodifferencehow
strongitis.
Two-Factor Authentication
Two-factor authentication (2FA) is gaining acceptance. Two-factor authentication is a security process in
which the user provides two means of identification from separate categories of credentials; one is
typically a physical token, such as a card (a possession factor); and the other is typically something
memorized,suchasasecuritycode(aknowledgefactor).
We may not be aware that we are now using two-factor authorization. Perhaps the most common 2FA
usageis anATMcard.Theusermustbeinpossessionof thecard(possessionfactor) andmustknowits
PIN(knowledgefactor).
Another example is when we must provide our zip code when we are making a credit-card purchase. In
eithercase,thesystemwithwhichwearedealingcanverifyourknowledgefactorand,inconjunctionwith
thepossessionfactorofthecard,canbequitecertainthatwearethelegitimatecardholder.
Amajordrawbacktotheuseofapossessionfactoristhatthetokenused(USBstick,bankcard,key,…)
mustbecarriedaroundbytheuseratalltimes.Ifthetokenislostorstolen,theusercannotauthenticate
himself.
MobilePhoneAuthentication
An increasingly common form of 2FA uses the user’s mobile phone as the possession factor. A user will
almostcertainlyhavehismobilephonewithhim.
Inordertousethisform of2FA,theusermusthaveregisteredhisphone withtheservice.Then,whenhe
logs ontotheservice withhis usernameandpassword,theservicesends him auniquenumber (perhaps
six digits in length) via SMS messaging. The user enters this number after his password to confirm to the
servicethat he is whohe says heis.Theauthenticationhas useda knowledgefactor (thepassword) and
apossessionfactor(themobilephone).
2
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

One problem with mobile phone 2FA techniques is that text messages sent to mobile phones via SMS
can be intercepted. This vulnerability may allow a hacker to impersonate a user and hack into his
account.
Biometrics
Inseveral Latin Americancountries,biometrics (inherencefactors) arebeing used for authentication.The
inherence factors are usually fingerprints. A citizen will register with a service by providing his national
identificationnumberandhisfingerprints.
Then,forinstance,whenhevisitsanATM,hehasnoneedforaPIN.HeinsertshisATMcardandplaces
afingeronafingerprintreaderpad.Ifhisfingerprintmatches,histransactionisauthorized.
Fingerprint readers are available for use with desktop computers and laptops to control access to critical
applications.Manysmartphones todayhavescreens capableof readingfingerprints.Thephones include
iPhones,Androids,andBlackberrys.
Fingerprints have several advantages over PINs. They cannot be forgotten. They cannot be lost, stolen,
orcloned.However,theymayrequireanadditionalhardwarecomponent.
2FA Products
Thereareseveralcompaniesthatareproviding2FAproductsthatcompaniescanusetoincorporatetwo-
factorauthenticationintotheirservices.Theseinclude:
 RSASecurityID
 MicrosoftPhonefactor
 DellDefender(2FAandMFA)
 GoogleAuthenticator
AnRSASecurityIDKeyFob
Interestingly,theRSASecurityIDauthenticationtokenswerehackedin2011.
ThePayPalBreach
In 2014, security researchers discovered a flaw in PayPal’s implementation of two-factor authentication.
PayPal offered 2FA on its website but not via its mobile apps. If a user wanted 2FA on the website, he
signed up for it with PayPal. If the user then attempted to access his account via a mobile device, the
serverwouldhalttheloginprocess;andtheuserwouldbenotified.
The researchers found that theycould bypass two-factor authentication for a user who had subscribed to
it.Theycreatedtheir own appthat trickedthemobile app into thinkingthat it was dealing with an account
that did not have 2FA enabled. Their app interfaced with two APIs provided by PayPal. One handled
authenticationandonehandledmoneytransfers.
When the PayPal mobile app tried to access a 2FA-enabled account, the researchers’ app changed the
“2fa_enabled” value in the server’s response to “false.” This caused the PayPal mobile app to ignore the
2FAfeature and allowedit tologon totheuser’s PayPal account.Of course,ahacker wouldhave hadto
obtaintheuser’susernameandpassword,perhapsthroughphishing.
PayPalimmediatelydeployedafixbydisablingtheabilitytologonto2FAaccountsviaanymobileapp.
3
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Summary
Multifactor authentication brings a great deal of additional security to applications. 2FA can drastically
reduce the incidence of online fraud because stealing a victim’s password will no longer be enough to
supportamaliciouslogon.
Eachadditionalauthenticationfactormakesasystem moresecure.Becausethefactorsareindependent,
thecompromiseofoneshouldnotleadtothecompromiseofothers
General two-factor authentication is still in its infancy in terms of mainstream online services. However,
watchforittopickupmomentumasthecostofmaliciousactivityincreases.
Acknowledgements
Materialforthisarticlecamefromthefollowingsources:
Two-factorauthentication:Whatyouneedtoknow(FAQ),cNet;May23,2013.
PayPalerrorshowshowNOTtousetwo-factorauthentication,CSOOnline;June25,2014.
DuoSecurityResearchersUncoverBypassofPayPal’sTwo-FactorAuthentication,DuoSecurity;June
25,2014.
Two-factorauthentication(2FA)definition,TechTarget;2015.
Random-ize(http://random-ize.com/how-long-to-hack-pass/)
Two-stepverification,Wikipedia.
Two-factorauthentication,Wikipedia.
4
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com