Spamalytics
October2009
Masses of spam can bring your email service to its knees. To protect against this, complex spam
filtersareusedonemailserversandonbrowsers.Buthoweffectivearethefilters?
To answer this question, a team of scientists at the Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, University of California, and the International Computer Science Institute became
spammersofsorts.Theyreasonedthatthebestwaytomeasurespamistobeaspammer.
The scientists orchestrated a parasitic infiltration of an existing spam botnet’s infrastructure and
caused it to modify some of the spam it was sending so as to redirect the spam to web sites
under the control of the team. These web sites presented “defanged” versions of the spammer’s
ownwebsites.
The infiltration was accomplished by masquerading as bots under the control of the infiltrated
botnet.1Theteammodifiedspam sothatitwouldcausenoharm toanyone.Allitdidwastoallow
theteamtomeasuretheconversionrateofitsmodifiedspamcampaigns.
The team defined “conversion rate” as the probability that a spam email will result in a desired
action. There were two desired actions that they studied – the purchase of a product and the
infectionofabrowser.
Armed with these results and with the cost of spam mailings, the team then considered the value
propositionofspamming.Theycallthisscience“spamalytics.”
The Subterfuge
TheStormBotnet
The research team selected the Storm botnet as its victim. Storm is one of the largest spam
service providers. It spreads itself by encouraging recipients of some of its email spam to visit a
web site under its control. Those that visit and then download an executable become infected
with the Storm Trojan. The Storm Trojan is a piece of malware that contacts a Storm master
serverandreportsfordutyasabot.
Storm organizes its bots into a hierarchy. At the top are the master servers that are controlled
directly by the botmaster. The master servers communicate with proxy bots that are infected
browsers. Proxy bots communicate with worker bots that form the mass of the Storm army. The
1 Chris Kanich, Christian Kreibich, Kirill Levchenko, Brandon Enright, Geoffrey Voelker, Vern Paxson, Stefan Savage,
Spamalytics:AnEmpiricalAnalysisofSpamMarketingConversion,CommunicationsoftheACM;September,2009.
1
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

worker bots harvest email addresses from the address books of their local browser hosts for use
bythebotnet.
A spam campaign is defined by an email message and a recipient count (typically in the millions
of recipients). To initiate a spam campaign, a master server distributes directives to a set of its
proxybots withthespam emailmessageandatarget address listfor eachproxybot.Thetotalof
thetargetemailaddressesequalstherecipientcountforthecampaign.
Each proxybot then sends directives to its designated list of worker bots with the emailmessage
and a subset of the target address list. Each worker bot sends the spam email message to its
specified addresses. A spam email can be sent to millions of unsuspecting users in minutes.
Upon completion, each worker bot sends a completion report to the master server via its proxy
bot.
TheInfiltration
The team’s infiltration strategy was to pose as a set of eight proxies to a Storm master server by
infecting the team’s hosts with the Storm malware. This would cause the team’s hosts to contact
a Storm master server, which would appoint the hosts as proxy bots. When one of the team’s
proxy bots received a directive for a spam campaign from a master server, the proxy bot would
modify the URL in the email message before sending it to its worker bots so that the email
message pointed to a defanged web site managed by the team. Two web sites, identical in
appearancetothespammer’swebsites,weredeveloped:
 A web site that attempted to sell pharmaceutical products to the recipient. It collected no
sensitive information such as name, address, or credit card number. A “sale” occurred if
therecipientaccessedthewebsiteandwenttoitspurchasepage.
 Awebsitethatappearedto deliver anelectronic postcard.This website was designedto
propagate a harmless Trojan to the browser. All the Trojan did was to report back to the
team’sproxybotrthatithadsuccessfullyinfectedthebrowser.
To evaluate the effectiveness of different email-filtering methods, the team set up several test
email addresses and included them in the target email address lists sent to the worker bots. By
noting the number of messages that were actually received, the proportion of messages rejected
bythefilterscouldbedetermined.
TheCampaigns
Threespam campaignsweredesigned.Twoofthese, thepostcardcampaignandtheAprilFool’s
campaign (sent as postcards on or about April 1), were structured to propagate a Storm Trojan.
Thethirdcampaignwasonedesignedtosellpharmaceuticals.
The campaigns lasted almost a month. During this time, worker bots were instructed to send 348
millionpharmacyspams,75millionpostcardspams,and37millionAprilFool’sspams
Together, over 469 million emails were sent. Under the direction of a Storm master server, up to
2.5 million emails per hour were sent. The average number of worker bots assigned to a proxy
botforacampaigndayaveraged23butpeakedat500.Thepharmacycampaignusedmorethan
31,000 worker bots over its life. Most worker bots attached to a proxy bot only once over the
length of the campaigns. It is estimated that these campaigns used only about 1.5% of Storm’s
workerbots.
2
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

TheGoal
Thegoalofthisexercisewastomeasureseveralspamparameters:
 Theproportionofspamthatwasfilteredbytheantispamsolutions.
 Theproportionofspamthatwassuccessfullydelivered.
 Theproportionofspamthatresultedinclick-throughs.
 Theproportionofspamthatresultedinsales.
 The length of time that a spam web site needed to be up to garner maximum sales
followingaspamemailcampaign.
Conversion Analysis
TheSpamConversionPipeline
The spam conversion pipeline is shown in Figure 1. It starts with a set of email addresses
targeted by the spam campaign (1). Some of this email is not delivered for a variety of reasons,
such as no-longer existing email addresses or blacklisted worker bots (2). Of the valid email
addresses,some(hopefullymost) getblockedbyspam filters ateither the emailservers or atthe
users’ browsers or get put into a spam folder (3). Of the email that gets through the spam filters,
mostwillbeignoredbytheusers(4).
Some emails will result in click-throughs to the spam web site, but the users will leave the site
after taking no action (5). The remaining users who visit will convert. If the web site is a malware
site, users will become infected if they download and run an executable (6a). If it is a purchase
site, some users will make a purchase (6b). Actions (6a) and 6b), infection or purchase, are
successfulspamconversions.
ConversionResults
As noted above, almost a half-billion spam emails for the three campaigns made up the target
emailaddresses.Ofthisamount,25%wasreportedasbeingdeliveredbytheworkerbots.
The team did not have a method for measuring the amount of spam email that was passed by
various spam filters. However, tests of three popular free email services (Gmail, Yahoo, and
Hotmail) indicated that only about .001% to .007% of the team’s email messages got past the
spam filter.Thatmeans thatallbutoneto sevenoutof 100,000spam messages weremissedby
thespamfilters.About15,000emailsofthehalf-billionsentresultedinclick-throughs.
3
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Of the 125 million postcard and April Fool’s spam emails sent, 541 users were infected. The 350
million pharmacy emails that were sent resulted in 28 purchases (27 of which were for male
enhancementproducts).
20% of the conversions were made in the first hour of the campaign. 70% were made in the first
day following the spam campaign. 90% were made in the first week, and almost 100% were
madeinthefirstmonth.Therefore,abogus website mustbearoundfor awhile togetfullbenefit
fromacampaign.
The team found that most spam email was directed at U.S. residents. However, India, Pakistan,
andBulgariahadthehighestresponserates.TheU.S.hadthelowest.
The conversion rate of spam is almost negligible;2 but if it is inexpensive enough, it can still be
profitable.Thisisthequestiontacklednextbytheteam.
The Value Proposition
The team was quick to point out that their experiment was just one point on the curve, and other
similar experiments might yield significantly different results. However, using the experiment’s
data, some interesting though perhaps speculative observations can be made about the
economicviabilityofspamming.
Inthecaseofthepostcard andAprilFool’scampaigns,these weretargetedatgrowingtheStorm
bot base and did not have a specific profit motive. It is estimated that Storm self-propagation
campaignscangenerate3,500to8,500newworkerbotsperday.
However, the pharmacy campaign was justified strictly on the basis of the money that it could
make.Therearethreebasicparametersintheprofitabilityvaluepropositionequation:
 Thecostofaspamcampaign.
 Theconversionrate.
 Theprofitonasale.
In the pharmacy campaign, the average sale that would have resulted was about $100. This
meansthatthecampaignwouldhavebroughtin$2,800inrevenuetothepartythatcontractedfor
it. The party’s profit would have been a fraction of this due to possible affiliation fees, web site
costs,andotherexpenses.
Anecdotal evidence places the cost of a spam campaign at about $80 per million emails, with
substantial discounts for large volumes. Thus, the pharmacy campaign of 350 million emails
would have cost about $28,000. Clearly, this particular campaign, which would have brought in
only $2,800, would have been a big loser. In fact, because of the discrepancy between revenue
and cost in this experiment, the authors speculate that the pharmacy web site was in fact owned
andrunbyStormitself.
However,clearlytherearecampaignsthatdomakemoney,asevidencedbythecontinuingspam
that gets through to our mailboxes. Spam services continue to be attractive to the disreputable
communityofbusinesses.
2AWallStreetJournalinvestigationofHowardCarmack,the“BuffaloSpammer,”reportedinanop-edarticleonJune23,
2003, revealedthat he hadconverted10,000,000spam emails into3,600sales foranherbal stimulant. It appears that
spamfiltershavecomealongway.
4
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Summary
Theteam concludedfrom this experimentthattheprofitmarginfor spam maybe meager enough
that spammers must be sensitive to the details of how their campaigns are run. So how can this
informationbeusedtoreduceoreliminatespam?
Trying to shut down spammers under anti-spamming laws hasn’t worked. Spammers are fast on
their feet, continually changing their domain addresses before law enforcement can catch up.
Furthermore,manyoperateincountrieswithnoanti-spamminglaws.
Imposing a postage fee on email won’t work. A postage fee of only a penny per hundred emails
could seriously alter the economics of spamming if the spammer paid the postage. But as seen
withtheStormbotnet,thespammerdoesn’tpaythepostage.Theinfectedusersdo.
However, as seen by the minimum amount of spam email that gets through the spam filters, the
spammers are economically sensitive to spam defensive measures. If we can improve these
defenses faster than the spammers can react, they might dry up and go away. This requires that
anti-spam defenses to stop incoming spam as well as outgoing spam must be continually
improved (which they are) and that everyone must use good spam filtering tools (which they do
not).
Alternatively,advertisethe“delete”key.
5
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com