Marketo Goes Down, Revived by Customer
August 2017
Marketo Inc. makes marketing automation software for companies. Marketing
automation refers to software platforms and technologies designed for marketing
departments and organizations to more effectively market on multiple channels online
(such as email, social media, websites, etc.) and to automate repetitive tasks.
On July 25, 2017, Marketo suddenly went down. It had forgotten to renew its domain name, which had
just expired.
Marketo
Marketo’s Engagement Applications provide the ability to create, manage, and execute personalized
customer engagement at scale across every touchpoint: email, web, mobile, and more. With applications
from Marketo, its customers can create authentic experiences for everyone, everywhere, every time.
Marketo’s applications include:
• Marketing Automation – Create, automate, and measure campaigns across channels.
• Account-Based Marketing – Focus marketing on specific accounts.
• Email – Engage customers with relevant conversations in minutes.
• Mobile – Communicate with customers wherever they are.
• Social – Integrate social media to find customers and make them advocates.
• Digital Ads – Target the right customers with personalized display ads.
• Web – Interact dynamically with your customers on the website.
• Marketing Analytics – Improve your impact on the business.
• Predictive Content – Automatically give your customers the content they want.
On the morning of July 25, 2017, Marketo suddenly went dark. The links in email campaigns that were
currently underway became broken. Marketo’s other services were unavailable to its customers. It turned
out that the domain registration had expired and marketo.com no longer existed.
1
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

The domain had been set up for automatic renewal, but the process somehow failed. During the
company’s initial post mortem, CEO Steve Lucas said the company had so far “identified process errors
with auto renewals as well as human errors.” He apologized to his customers for the outage.
As it turned out, a Marketo customer, Trevis Prebble, saw the issue
and decided to step in and take action. Though he could have snagged
the domain for himself, he simply paid the renewal fee of $73.98 for
Marketo, and Marketo was back online by noontime. Marketo’s domain
is now renewed until 2021.
However, global DNS propagation of the changes were still causing some serious issues. It was a waiting
game for many customers to regain full access to Marketo’s services as it took up to two days for the
changes to propagate around the world. Customers could not stop broken email campaigns.
Marketo pointed no fingers. They assumed responsibility and took control of the situation. They kept the
world up to date on their progress, and responded well to critics. In response to one critical tweet, they
tweeted back:
“A wise man once said, ‘All men make mistakes, but only wise men learn from their mistakes.’
We’re learning.”
Summary
It wasn’t just a bad day for Marketo. It was a bad day for the users of their platform. Marketo’s users had
no access to their content, their scheduled emails were being sent with broken links, and they had no way
to stop their faulty email campaigns.
But Marketo took full responsibility, and with the great help of Travis Prebble was able to assume
immediate control of the situation.
2
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Acknowledgements
Information for this article was taken from the following sources:
Marketo Didn’t Renew Their Domain, Jason Marlowe blog; July 25, 2017.
Marketo suffers major outage after domain renewal fail, IT News; July 27, 2017.
3
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman
