Active/Active Payment Processing at Swedbank
January2008
Based in Stockholm, Sweden, Swedbank (www.swedbank.com)
is one of the largest retail banks in the Nordic region. It is the
leading bank in Sweden, Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania; and it
also operates in Denmark, Finland, Norway, Western Russia, Luxembourg, Ukraine, the U.S.,
China, and Japan. It has more than 21,000 employees serving nine million private and a half
millioncorporateclients.
Though its core market is not euro-based, Swedbank is planning to become SEPA-compliant.
SEPA is the Single Euro Payments Area designed to make intercountry payments transparent.
Thiscompliance willgiveitscustomersthecapabilityofpayingandreceivingelectronicpayments
ineurosaseasilyandreliablyasiscurrentlydoneineachEU(EuropeanUnion)country.
Swedbank’s Need to Go Active/Active
Among its other services, Swedbank processes electronic payment requests for a number of
Swedish and overseas banks as well as ATM payments and payment requests from Swedbank’s
owncustomers.Processingover onebilliontransactions per year,itauthorizes andauthenticates
largevolumesofbankingtransactions.
Swedbank has been a long-time user of ACI’s Base24 application to provide these functions. Its
Base24 application has always run on HP NonStop servers to provide high levels of availability.
In its initial configuration, Swedbank operated a hot backup site for testing and for failover in the
event of a primarysystem failure. However, the time that it took to fail over to the backup system
for planned or unplanned events precluded the system from achieving true 24x7 service to
Swedbank’scustomers.
Because of the growing importance of the payment authorization and authentication functions,
Swedbank decided that it had to offer true 24x7 service for these critical functions to its
customers. When these functions are unavailable due to unplanned or planned downtime, the
bank’scustomerscannotusetheircreditordebitcardsforpaymentatpoint-of-saledevices orfor
withdrawals at ATM machines. Any outage can severely impact satisfaction and loyalty, which
may ultimately affect the bank’s revenue. Therefore, Swedbank recently moved its payment
authorizationandauthenticationfunctionstoaNonStopactive/activeconfiguration.1
Swedbank’s Active/Active System
TheSwedbank active/activesystem runsontwoNonStopservernodes separatedgeographically
to provide disaster tolerance.2 Both nodes are active and are processing different transactions
1WhatisActive/Active?,AvailabilityDigest;October,2006.
2 Press release, Swedbank Uses GoldenGate’s Active/Active Software Solution to Provide Continuous Availability for
PaymentProcessingApplication;October29,2007.
1
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

againsttheir owncopies of theapplication database.Transactions aresplit betweenthenodes to
provideloadbalancing.
Should one node fail or be takenofflinefor plannedhardware or software maintenance, upgrade,
or migration, all transactions are simply routed to the surviving node for processing. Thus,
planned downtime is eliminated; and recovery from a sudden failure occurs literally within
seconds.True24x7operationisachieved.
Because each node must be able to handle the full load when the other node is down, there is
ample excess capacity available when the system is running normally with both nodes in
operation. This excess capacity becomes invaluable when the system must cope with sudden
peaks in demand, such as during the holiday season or at the end of the month when most
peopledoalotofshoppingorgoonlinetopaybills.
Data Replication with GoldenGate
Because each of the nodes in the active/active system uses its own database copy, these
database copies must be kept in synchronism. Only in this way can a transaction be processed
arbitrarilyateithernode.
In Swedbank’s active/active system, the database copies are kept synchronized via data
replication. As a change is made to one database copy, that change is immediately replicated to
the other database copy so that both database copies always reflect the same state of the
application.
Swedbank chose the GoldenGate for Active-Active data replication engine from GoldenGate
Software, Inc. (www.goldengate.com)3 to provide the data replication services required to keep
the database copies in synchronism. Headquartered in San Francisco, GoldenGate has more
than 350 customers worldwide using GoldenGate products to capture, route, transform, deliver,
andverifytransactionaldatainrealtimeacrossheterogeneousenvironments.
Swedbank decided to use the GoldenGate product because of its known out-of-the-box
interoperability with Base24. In addition, GoldenGate products had already been used
successfullybyotherSwedbankdepartments.
Swedbank’s active/active configuration was also put to use to migrate the bank’s earlier NonStop
servers to HP’s new Integrity platform. By taking down one server at a time, upgrading it, and
thenreturningittoservice,thismajorupgradewasmadewithnoapplicationdowntime.
Data Collision Resolution
With asynchronous replication engines such as those provided by GoldenGate, there is a delay
from thetimethatachangeismadetothesourcedatabasetothetimethatthechangeisapplied
to the target database. This is due not only to the processing time of the data replication engine
but also to the channel propagation time required to send the change over the communication
network.Thisdelayisknownasreplicationlatency.
It is possible that each of the nodes might attempt to change the same object in the application
database nearlysimultaneouslywithin the replication latencyinterval. In this case, each node will
execute its own update to the data object and will then replicate that change to the other node.
There, the node will overwrite its original change with the change replicated by the other node.
3 Flexible Availability Options with GoldenGate’s Transactional Data Management Platform (TDM), Availability Digest;
February,2007.
2
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

The value of both data objects is now different, and both are wrong. This is known as a data
collision.
The GoldenGate replication engine provides several strategies for resolving data collisions. In
Swedbank’s case, business rules were defined to choose which change to accept and which to
reject. These business rules were implemented as user exits provided by the replication engine.
Rejectedchangesareloggedforlatermanualreview.
Summary
In order to provide true 24x7 availability of its ACI Base24 payment authorization and
authentication services, Swedbank chose to move to an active/active system using HP NonStop
server nodes and GoldenGate data replication to keep the nodal database copies synchronized.
This configuration has proven that it can fulfill the 24x7 need. Swedbank has been operating its
dual-nodeactive/activesystemsince2006withnooutagesorserviceissues.
3
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
