Recovery-as-a-Service
February2013
Earlyadapters have proven the feasibility and cost advantages of moving applications to the cloud. Early
on, cloud services such as Software-as-a-Service (SaaS), Infrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS), and
Platform-as-a-Service paved the way for many companies to take advantage of the cloud without having
to get closely involved. SaaS offered CRM (Customer Resource Management) and ERP (Enterprise
ResourcePlanning)services.IaaSprovidedwebhostingservices.PaaSletcustomersleveragethecloud
providers’serversandstoragesystemsfortheirownpurposes.
Though most applications running in the cloud are still low-risk applications, more and more core
applications are being moved to the cloud. This move is being aided by the provision of redundant cloud
services such as Amazon’s Availability Zones, which lets a backup copy of an application run in another
fault-isolatedZone.
The new cloud killer-app may be Recovery-as-a-Service (RaaS), using the cloud to backup and to
recover critical services that are running in a company’s data center. Though RaaS has yet to become
mainstream,cloudserviceproviders,ITresellers,andstartupsarejumpingonthebandwagon.
Traditional Disaster Recovery
Traditional disaster recovery is expensive and complex and often results in long recovery times and high
data loss, both of which can be unacceptable to a company’s operations. There are several
considerationsinadisasterrecoverystrategyforanapplication:
 RTO,orrecoverytimeobjective–Thisisthemaximum amountoftimeforrecoverythatacompany
iswillingtotolerate.
 RPO,orrecoverypointobjective–Thisisthemaximum amountofdatathatacompanyis willingto
lose.
 Performance – The recovery solution must provide acceptable throughput and response time for
everyprotectedapplication.
 Consistency–Followinganoutage,theapplicationmustbereturnedtoaconsistentstatetoensure
theaccuracyoftheapplication.
 Geographic Separation – The production site and the backup site must befar enough apart so that
nosingledisasterwillimpactbothsites.
Theseneedshavebeenmettovaryingdegreeswithvariouslevelsofbackup:
1
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

 Cold backup site – Data is replicated periodically, such as every few hours or daily, typically to
magnetic tape or to disk-based virtual tape, which is stored offsite for safety. Backup servers are
not readily available. In the event of a site disaster, it can take hours or days to purchase
replacement servers, to bring them out of storage, or to repurpose test or development systems for
production use. Hours of data since the last backup will be lost. RTOs and RPOs are measured in
days.Thisisthelow-costoptionforapplicationsthatdonotrequirehighavailability.
 Warm backup site – Standby servers are kept in a standby state such that they can be put into
service in a matter of hours. Periodic data replication moves production data to backup disks at the
recoverysiteeveryfewhours.RTOsandRPOsaretypicallymeasuredinhours.
 Hot backup site – Servers at the backup site are kept mirrored with the production servers and are
readyto be put immediately into operation. Data is replicated to the backup site everyfew seconds
orminutes.RTOsandRPOsofminutescanbeachieved.
These disaster recovery strategies have served the IT industry well for decades. However, they suffer
fromseveralchallenges:
 They are costly. Not only does a remote disaster-recovery data center need to be built and
manned, but duplicate server, storage, and networking equipment needs to be purchased and
maintained(coldbackupsmitigatethesecoststosomeextent).
 The cost of reducing RPOs and RTOs from days to hours to minutes becomes increasingly
expensive.
 Backup data centers are expensive to scale incrementally. If more processing capacity is needed,
newserversmayhavetobepurchased.
 Backup data centers represent an increased burden on the company’s IT staff to deploy, configure
andadminister.
 Theintegration,coordination,andschedulingofdisparatesystemsatmultiplesitesiscomplex.
 The configuration of the production and backup systems must generally be identical. When a
hardwareorsoftwarechangeismadetotheproductionsystem,itmustalsobemadetothebackup
system.Configurationdriftisamajorcauseoffailoverfaults.
 Periodic testing of backup and recovery procedures is costly. It is often not done thoroughly,
resultinginpotentialrecoveryfailuresfollowinganoutage.
Using Cloud Services for Backup and Recovery
Havingdedicated infrastructuretiedup waitingfor adowntimeevent is averyinefficientuseof resources.
The cost and complexity of traditional disaster recovery sites has discouraged many small- to medium-
sized businesses (SMBs) from implementing effective backup sites. Consequently, they are exposed to
the dangers of a site outage. Government statistics show that 93% of companies that lose their data
centersformorethantendaysfileforbankruptcywithinayear.
2
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

DisasterRecoveryforSmall-toMedium-SizedCompanies
Cloud-based disaster-recoveryservices have the potential to address these concerns.1With cloud-based
RaaS, virtual images of physical or virtualized servers at the production site are maintained in the cloud,
as is the current application data. Changes to application data or to server configurations are periodically
replicated to the cloud to update these images so that the cloud images represent a reasonably up-to-
date state of the production site. If the production site experiences a server, storage, or even a total site
outage, the virtual images in the cloud can be invoked to continue processing in a time ranging from
minutestoafewhours.
The primary concern for SMBs is the cost of disaster recovery. Cloud-based recovery addresses this
concern directly. There are no upfront costs for a second data-center site or for duplicate servers,
storage, and networking gear. Rather, backup images of virtual servers and of replicated data are stored
inthecloud,but areotherwisepassive,usingjuststoragespaceand littleprocessing. Cloudcosts areon
a pay-for-usage basis. Therefore, the cost during normal operation is relatively small. It is only in the
event of a production outage that the virtual backup servers in the cloud spring into action and costs
escalate.Hopefully,thisishardlyever.
A strong secondary concern is the load imposed on the existing IT staff to manage a disaster recovery
site. With cloud backup, services are deployed and managed by the cloud provider. Processing facilities
are easy to scale and provide protection to accommodate future growth. The virtualized backup servers
andstorageareeasytomanagewithautomatedcloudtools.
CloudrecoveryservicesarepositionedtomovemanySMBstoaneffectivedisaster-recoverystrategy.
Cloud-BasedRecoveryOptions
Thereareseveralwaysinwhichthecloudcanbeusedtoprovideapplicationbackupservices.
BothProductionandBackupintheCloud
The production applications can be run in the cloud, and backups provided in the cloud itself. This is the
technique currently being used with, for instance, Amazon’s Availability Zones. This requires a major
commitmenttocloud processing,butmanylarge organizations aredoingthis for arange of non-criticalto
criticalapplications.
A major exposure with this method is the possibility of a total cloud failure. Though this is highly unlikely
the probability of such an event is not zero. The Never Again stories in the Availability Digest are loaded
with cloud failures lasting for hours or days, from Amazon Web Services and Microsoft’s Azure Cloud to
smallercloudprovidersaswell.Ifsuchacloudfailureoccurs,thecompany’sIToperationsaredown.
BackuptoandRestorefromtheCloud
The cloud can be used to replace magnetic tape or disk-based virtual tape. Used in this way, virtual
server images and database changes are replicated periodically to the cloud. Should the company
experienceanoutage,virtualmachineimages andup-to-datedatabases canbesenttoarecoverysiteto
continueproduction.
A limitation of this method is therecoverytimeof the database. Even modest-sizeddatabases could take
hours or more to transmit over the Internet or even a dedicated communication channel. This will
significantlyslowrecovery.
1MuchofthematerialforthisarticlewastakenfromanexcellentarticlebyNitinMishraentitledAdvantagesofDisasterRecoveryas
aService, publishedinDataCenterKnowledge.
3
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

BackuptoandRestoreintheCloud
This is Recovery-as-a-Service, RaaS. With this technique, images of production physical and virtual
machines are sent to the cloud, as is the application database. The virtual machine states and the
application database in the cloud are maintained in synchronism with the production systems via
replication.
If aserver or theentireproductionsiteshould fail, the corresponding virtualmachines in the cloudcan be
quickly invoked, the user networks switched so as to reroute further traffic to the cloud, and application
servicescancontinue.
PrioritizingApplications
Theamountoffailureprotectionneededbyacompanyvaries withtheapplication.Someapplicationscan
tolerate days of downtime, and no backup facilities may be necessary. Others can be down for a day, for
a few hours, or perhaps for only a few minutes. This is often related to the cost of downtime, which may
rangefromnegligibletosevenfiguresperhour.
The requirements for each application must be specified, and an appropriate backup strategy for each
determined.Thisdeterminationwillbeabalancebetweenthecostofdowntimeandthecostofrecovery.
Note that it is not really the application availability that is important. It is the availability of the services
provided by the application that counts. If there is an alternate way to continue providing critical services
shouldanapplicationfail,thismayaffecttherecoverystrategyforthatapplication.
The Advantages of RaaS
The advantages of RaaS are many.We have already described one of the most important advantages –
thesignificantlyreducedcostsofcreatingandmaintainingabackupfacility.Otheradvantagesinclude:
 Backup resources can be provisioned in minutes. RTOs measured in minutes or an hour or so are
quiteachievable.Faster recoverytime(seconds to minutes) can be achieved by havingthebackup
virtual servers up and running, ready to take over. However, this obviates to some extent the cost
advantages of RaaS as these resources will have to be paid for even when the production system
isoperating.
 The backup services can be activated from a user portal – perhaps a wirelessly connected laptop.
Thereis noneedtocall the cloud provider.Thebackupprocess canbegin as soonas anoutage is
detected.
 The backup and recovery process can be automated, lowering recovery times and recovery
failures.
 Virtualization eliminates hardware and software dependencies because the cloud’s virtual
environmentiskeptsynchronizedviareplication.Configurationdriftisnotaconcern.
 The backup configuration can be easily scaled by user command. If more processing power is
required, it can be configured remotely by the user. If less processing is required, virtual machines
canbeshutdowntosavecosts.Resourcesareelastic.
 The cloud provider manages and maintains the disaster recovery services. This reduces the
customer’songoingITcosts.
4
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

 The cloud disaster recovery system is easier to test. Tests can be run quarterly or monthly rather
thanannually,
Challenges with RaaS
Recovery-as-a-Servicedoesnotcomewithoutconcerns.
 The same effort for preparation, planning, and testing that would normally accompany a warm-site
build-outisrequiredforaRaaSimplementation.
 Staffmustbetrainedinfailoverandfallbackprocedures.
 The location of the cloud facilities should provide the geographical separation from the production
siterequiredtopreventacommondisasterfromaffectingboth.
 The company has less control over transaction throughput and response time. It must be ensured
that enough cloud resources can be provisioned to provide the capacity needed by the production
applications.
 In bringing up the backup resources, there will be interdependencies between applications.
Applicationsmustbebroughtupintheproperorder.
 There is a dependency on network availability and capacity. Dual networks to the cloud provider
mayberequiredtoensure connectivitywhenneeded. IftheInternetistobeused,willitsupportthe
required response times? Unanticipated extra bandwidth may take time to provision and will result
inextracosts.
 Network procedures must be put into place to redirect users, employees, and IT staff to the cloud-
basedservices.
 The cloud provider’s services must comply with regulatory security requirements such as those for
financialandhealthservices.Encryptionatrestandin-flightmayberequired.
 Theremustbeaprocedure forfailingback totheproductionsitewhenitis returnedtoservice.This
mayrequireaphasedrecoveryoftheproductionservices.
 Ancillary services may have to be addressed. For instance, an application may need to print
documentsfortheusers.
 Cross-DR providers maycreate aparticular problem Mostclouds aredesignedto handleWindows,
Linux, and Unix virtual machines. This is a function of the virtualization facility that they are using.
However, many mission-critical applications run on mainframes whose backups are likely to be
located in other backup data centers. Provision must be made to integrate the virtualized cloud
backupsitewiththeseotherDRsites.
 Thedisasterrecoverysiteandfailoverproceduresmustbetestedperiodically.
 Ifamajordisastershouldaffectmanyofthecloudprovider’sRaaScustomers,theprovidermaynot
haveenoughcapacityforallcustomers.
Evaluating a RaaS Solution
Whenevaluatinga RaaSsolution,severalaspects mustbeconsidered.Replicas of allprotectedsystems
and data must be replicated frequently enough to satisfy the applications’ RPOs. Systems should be
5
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

recoverable in a time sufficientlyshort to meet the applications’ RTOs. The recovery of any element (file,
server, disk, storage system) should be controllable by a user-driven self-service portal. Communication
facilities between the production site and the cloud should be optimized to ensure full data mobility at
minimumbandwidth.Thecloudmustcomplywiththecompany’ssecuritypolicies.
TheSLAwiththecloudprovidershouldaddressthefollowingpoints:
 Theleadtimetoallocateminimumrequiredresourcesfollowingadisaster.
 Theleadtimetoscaleuptorequiredcapacity.
 Thedurationforwhichresourceswillberetainedonadedicatedbasisforthecompany.
 Additionalfeesforoccupancybeyondthedefinedperiod.
 Thecostsforadditionalfacilitiessuchasconferencerooms,videoconferencing.
 Provisionsforfailoverandfallbacktesting.
 Cloud-basedvalidationofreplicateddata(forinstance,periodicallycomparingblockchecksums).
 Thecapabilitytoprovideadditionalcapacityifneeded.
 A guarantee that resources will be available in the event of multiple data center failures of other
customersofthecloudprovider.
 Therequireddatasecuritypolicies.
As a final step before signing on with a cloud provider, a company should run drills verifying that the
company’srecoveryrequirementscanbemet.
Summary
Implementing a disaster-recovery solution is never simple. Cloud-based recovery can make the task
mucheasier,morereliable,andlesscostlyformanycompanies.
Large companies already have disaster-recovery infrastructures in place and may not be so ready to
move recovery to the cloud to protect their valuable and critical services. Small companies are less likely
tohaveaformalDRstrategy.
However,cloudrecoverywillbecomeattractive,especiallytomedium-sizedcompanies.Gartner predicts2
that 30% of mid-sized companies – those with annual revenues from $150 million to $1 billion – will have
adoptedRaaSby2014.Thatisupfrom7%in2011.
2GartnerSays30PercentofMidsizeCompaniesWillUseRecovery-as-a-Serviceby2014,Gartner;November7,2011.
6
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com