Oracle’s Ticking Time Bomb
February2012
A potentially catastrophic bug that has been around for years has been discovered in the Oracle
database. Left unfixed, the bug could crash all of the interconnected databases in a large enterprise,
though no data would be lost. Recovery would take days or even weeks. Such a disaster might occur
duetonormaloperation,oritcouldbeexploitedbyamaliciousattacker.
It was journalists at InfoWorld who discovered the flaw and who notified Oracle in November, 2011.
OracleaskedInfoWorldnottoreporttheflawuntilapatchcouldbeissuedinorder toavoidexploitationof
the flaw against unsuspecting users. The patch was issued on January 17, 2012, and InfoWorld
publisheditsexposélaterthesameday.1Inthisarticle,wesummarizetheInfoWorldreport.
The System Change Number
The problem stems from a mechanism deep within the Oracle database – one with which Oracle DBAs
seldomdeal.ItistheSystemChangeNumber(SCN).
Oracle’sSCNClock
The SCN is essentially the Oracle timekeeper. It is a number that is incremented and appended to every
committed transaction. Like any clock, the SCN can never move backwards – it must always tick
forwards.ToensurethattheSCN willneverbeexhausted,itisconfiguredas averylargenumber–a48-
bitfield,whichsupportsamaximumvalueof2.8x1014ticks.
The SCN is the key to maintaining data consistency. Every block in the Oracle Redo log contains the
beginningandendingSCNoftransactionsinthatblock.
TheSCNservesmanypurposes.Forone,itisusedbyOracletoensurethatqueryresultsareconsistent.
Ifthedatatobereturnedbyaqueryisbeingactivelyupdated,Oracleensuresthatalldataitemsreturned
inresponsetothequeryhaveanSCNthatisequaltoorlessthantheSCNvalueatthetimeofthequery.
Another use of the SCN is to guarantee that replicated transactions are applied to the target database in
the correct order to guarantee integrity of the target database. The SCN also can be used to restore a
databasetoaspecifiedpointintime.WithOracle10g,forinstance,the SCN can bemappedtoaspecific
timewithinthreeseconds.
1FundamentalOracleFlawRevealed,InfoWorld,January17,2012
1
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

TheSCNSoftLimit
To ensure that a database is managing its SCN properly, a soft SCN limit is maintained. It is calculated
under the assumption that the database has been committing 16,384 (214) transactions per second since
January 1, 1988. This is intended to be an unrealistically high transaction rate in order that the SCN of a
database should never even approach the soft limit. At 16K transactions per second, it will take almost
fiveandone-halfcenturies (544 years,tobemoreexact)toexhausttheSCN –longpasttheprobablelife
oftheOracleproduct.
Should the SCN of a database exceed the soft limit, it is an indication of a database malfunction. The
databaseisconsideredunstableandunusable.
LinkedDatabases
Oracle databases can be linked across the enterprise. If two or more databases connect to each other,
they synchronize their SCNs to maintain data consistency. Since the SCN can never tick backwards, all
databases set their SCN to that of the database with thehighest SCN. Therefore,adatabase’s SCN may
jumpforwardwhenitlinkstoanotherdatabase.
If a database’s SCN exceeds the SCN soft limit, other databases cannot connect to it since it is
consideredunreliable.
The Hot-Backup Bug
Onthesurface,Oracle’sSCNmethodtomaintaindataconsistencyseemssolid.Infactithasworkedwell
fordecades.ButInfoWorlddiscoveredapotentiallydamagingflaw.
TheproblemisnotwithSCNpersebutisratheracodingflawinOracle’shot-backuputility.Oracleallows
a database administrator to make a hot backup of an operational database by entering a simple
command. Though there are several ways for a DBA to initiate a hot backup, one is via the command
‘ALTER DATABASE BEGIN BACKUP.’ Unfortunately, a bug in this method of invoking a hot backup
causes the database’s SCN to increase dramatically – perhaps by millions or even billions of ticks in a
shorttime.
A billion (109) is small compared to the SCN range of about 2.8x1014 – it would take 280,000 billion ticks
to exhaust the SCN. However, it is not the SCN range that is of concern – it is the SCN soft limit. If it
takes 544 years to exhaust the SCN, and it is now 2012, the soft limit has been escalating for 24 years
andhasreachedabout4.4%oftheSCNlimit.Itwillnottake280,000billiontickstoreachthesoftlimit–it
will take about 12,000 billion ticks. If the average escalation of the SCN due to hot backups is one billion
ticks (this number is not really known), the system is within 12,000 hot backups of reaching the soft SCN
limit.
Herein lies the problem. Each time a database administrator performs a hot backup on his database, the
database’s SCN increases dramatically. When he then connects his database to other databases, their
SCNs are reset to the new, expanded SCN and increase, say, by a billion. The elevated SCN flows from
onedatabaseinstancetoanotherlikeavirus.Thereisnogoingback.
Some companies have hundreds of database servers running hundreds of instances of Oracle. In such a
large Oracle installation, if manyof the databases are backedup online with the problematic command,it
will not take too many years for all of the databases to reach the soft limit. Based on standard database
administrationprocedures,aDBAisunlikelytoeverseethishappening.
What results when the soft SCN limit is reached? None of the databases can interconnect, the
applicationscannotrun,andtheentireITinfrastructureoftheenterprisecrashes!
2
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

A Security Flaw
This catastrophic situation can be reached through normal operation of the company’s data centers.
However, the SCN flaw raises another concern. A bad actor could easily cause a system-wide crash of
interconnectedOracledatabases.Allhewouldneedis accesstoalow-prioritydatabasethatcanlink toa
high-priority database. He could write a script that performed multiple hot backups on the low-priority
databaseandthatperiodicallyconnectedthelow-prioritydatabasetothehigh-prioritydatabase.TheSCN
of the high-priority database would be escalated by perhaps trillions of ticks and would propagate this
expanded SCN to other databases to which it is linked. A few cycles of this malicious activitycould crash
largesegmentsofacompany’sITinfrastructure.
Recovery from a Soft SCN Limit Violation
Fortunately, there have been no reported instances yet of a soft SCN limit violation taking down a
company’sIToperations.Butifitshouldhappen,howcantheITsystemsberecovered?
One method would be to shut down all IT operations for several weeks to let the soft limit move forward.
However, it is unlikely that any company could afford to do that. In any event, that is just putting off the
problem.
A database could not simply be reloaded, since the current SCN for the database would be used as the
base for the replayed transactions. Rather, the database would have to be exported, dropped, and then
imported. For today’s petabyte databases, this could take days if not weeks, during which time much of
thecompany’sinfrastructurewouldbeunusable.
Oracle came out quickly with a patch that lets the DBA specify the soft SCN limit increment. The
increment defaults to 32K ticks per second, which doubles the soft limit. A DBA can increase this
parameter even further. This certainly gains some time, but the problem remains. Furthermore, if a
patched database links to an unpatched database, the connection will fail along with the application. To
makemattersworse,thepatchisavailableonlyforthemostrecentOracleversions.
This Oracleflawprobablywillbe experienced onlybythelargestOracle installations.However,itis these
installations that will take the longest time to recover and that will suffer the most consequences
financiallyaswellaswithrespecttocustomerretention,regulatoryissues,andadversepress.
The Oracle Fix
On November 17th, Oracle issued its first Critical Patch Update (CPU) of 2012. This CPU addressed 78
securityissuesacrossitsproductline.
Only two patches within this CPU related to Oracle. The patch of interest to this article (CVE-2012-0082)
removes the methods that arbitrarily increase the SCN. These methods include not only the hot-backup
bugdescribedabovebutalsoothersimilarbugsthatwerefound.Thepatchalsoincludesan“inoculation”
protection to prevent a databasefrom connecting with another database with an unreasonablyhigh SCN,
thoughthatSCNmaybewithinthesoftSCNlimit.
This patch is available only for certain Oracle 10g and 11g database versions.2 Oracle administrators
mustensurethatnounpatcheddatabasesareallowedtoconnecttoapatcheddatabase.
2Oracle11g11.1.0.7,11.2.0.2,and11.2.0.3aswellasOracle10g10.1.0.5,10.2.0.3,10.2.0.4,and10.2.0.5.
3
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Summary
Oracle’s SCN flaw is a ticking time bomb that is set to go off in 544 years. Occasionally, however, it ticks
outofcontrolandmayexplodequiteprematurely.
The SCN flaw has a low likelihood of impacting most companies except those that are running hundreds
of Oracle instances. However, if it does happen, the results are catastrophic. A company’s data centers
mightbedownforweeks.
It is therefore imperative that companies immediately install the patch that Oracle has provided to fix this
problem. Unfortunately, older versions of Oracle cannot be patched and will continue to exhibit the SCN
flaw. DBAs must make sure that patched databases do not link to unpatched databases. If older,
unpatched database instances are to be included in linked configurations, they should be upgraded to a
patchableversion.
Acknowledgments
OurthankstooursubscriberBruceHolensteinofGravic,Inc.,forbringingthisissuetoourattention.
In addition to the InfoWorld article previously referenced, information for this article was taken from the
followingsources:
AskTom(asktom.oracle.com)
OraclePatches78SecurityFlaws,eSecurityPlanet;January18,2012.
Oracle Accused Of Downplaying Severity Of Database Security Flaws, Tech Week Europe; January 19,
2012.
en.allexperts.com
4
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com