Hubble Trouble
January2009
The Hubble Space Telescope
Named for Edwin Hubble, an American astronomer, the
Hubble Space Telescope is perhaps one of NASA’s most
successful missions since the Apollo project put men on the
moon. Carried aboard the Discovery Space Shuttle from
Florida’s Kennedy Space Center on May 12, 1990, as a joint
effort by NASA and the European Space Agency, Hubble has
helped to pin down the age of the universe. It has pointed to
the existence of dark energy that apparently makes up the
bulkofthemassoftheuniverse.
The length of a school bus and weighing some twelve tons, Hubble has made over 100,000
revolutions 360 miles above the Earth since it was launched. It has been used by 4,000
astronomersaroundthe worldtocaptureimagesofplanetsinoursolarsystem aswellas images
offar-offstarsandgalaxies.
Hubble was designed for long life. It was the first space telescope designed to be serviced in
space by astronauts. All of its control and communications electronics are backed up by
redundant systems so that it can survive the failure of any electronic component. The backup
systemsarekeptturnedoffsothattheywilllastlongerinthehighradiationandlowtemperatures
ofspace.Ithasbeendiscoveredthatlittleagingoccursinanunpoweredcomponent.
However, with all of the care taken, Hubble was initially declared a massive failure. When it took
its first pictures in 1990, the pictures were fuzzy. It turned out that the problem was caused by a
major error in the telescope’s optics. Although the telescope’s main mirror had been ground to
great precision within 1/96 of the wave length of visible light, it was, nevertheless, ground wrong.
After months of analysis, it was determined that the problem could be corrected by new optical
components for the telescope’s instruments with the same error in the opposite sense to
compensate for the mirror’s error – in effect, a set of spectacles for Hubble to correct the optical
aberration. These corrections were installed on Hubble during the first servicing mission in 1993,
andHubble’ssightwasmadenear-perfect.
Since then, Hubble has captured some of the most beautiful high-resolution images of deep
space ever seen, transmitting back 66 gigabytes of information a day to the Goddard Space
FlightCenterinMaryland.
The Final Servicing Mission That Wasn’t
Over the years, three more missions were flown to service the telescope. They were made in
1997,1999,and2002.Worncomponents werereplaced.Opticalinstrumentswereupgraded.But
neverdidacomputercomponenthavetobereplaced.Notforeighteenyears.
1
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

The final mission to service Hubble was scheduled for October 14, 2008. After that, no more
servicingmissions couldbe scheduled because of the phasingoutof theSpace Shuttleprogram.
Ineffect,Hubblewouldbeonitsown.
However, just two weeks before that final mission, on September 27th, Hubble went dead.
Scrambling to find the cause, NASA postponed indefinitely the last servicing mission so that the
problemcouldberepairedbyaspacewalkifatallpossible.
In hindsight, this problem couldn’t have occurred at a better time. If it had happened three weeks
later, there would have been no opportunity to visit Hubble to make any necessary repairs.
Hubblemighthavebecomejustanotherpieceofspacejunk.
The Failure
Fortunately, the failure only prevented image data from being transmitted; but Hubble could still
receive commands from Goddard. This allowed the problem to be analyzed by the scientists and
engineersontheground.
They determined that the Science Data Formatter (SDF) had failed. This is an 80486-based
processor designed by IBM in the 1970s and built by Fairchild Camera and Instruments in the
1980s. It is responsible for formatting the image data from Hubble’s five main instruments into
packetsandsendingthemtoEarth.
The SDF is part of a larger system, the Science and Instrument Control and Data Handling
system (SIC&DH), which controls all of Hubble’s instruments. The SIC&DH comprises seven
components, including the failed SDF, the group of which are treated as a single system for
redundancy purposes. The SIC&DH system that failed is known as “Side A.” The dormant,
unpoweredbackupsystemis“SideB.”
When Side A failed, all of Hubble’s instruments went into “safe mode” to protect themselves.
Thus,withtheinstrumentsturnedoff,andwiththetransmissionofimagedatainterrupted,Hubble
appeareddead.
The Solution
The obvious solution was to fail over to the backup Side B SIC&DH. Having been unpowered for
eighteen years, Side B should have been as good as new. However, the last time it was
exercisedwasin1990,beforethelaunch.Wasitstillgood?
There was only one way to find out – put it into service. Provisions existed to switch the
redundant Side B SIC&DH into service, replacing the failed Side A, via commands from the
ground. This procedure understandably required significant planning since it had never been
done exceptinatestenvironmentprior tolaunch.On October 16th, 20days after theSDF failure,
NASAwasreadytotry.
ThefirststepwastoremotelycommandthebackupSIC&DHtopowerupandtakeovercontrol,a
procedure thattook abouttenhours. Data was uploadedto it, andthis data was transmittedback
to Goddard to verify that it had uploaded properly. Several of Hubble’s instruments were then
brought out of safe mode to verify that each had a working interface with Side B. To the relief of
all, these steps were successful; and the instruments were returned to safe mode to await
commandslaterintheday.
The next step was to send commands to switch Hubble’s science instruments from their safe
mode and to take internal exposures as a baseline test of the telescope’s instruments. This
2
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

baseline would be sent to Goddard, where it would be compared to an old Side A baseline to
verify proper operation of the instruments. Baseline checking was expected to be completed by
noontime,October 17th, andNASAannounced that theyexpected science observations to restart
sometimethemorningofOctober18th,twodayslater.
The Failover Fault
SIC&DH failover is complex. First, commands had to be sent to Hubble to command Side B to
take over. This had been successfully completed. Next, the instruments had to be recalibrated,
and baseline data had to be sent to Goddard to ensure that the instruments were working
properly.Atthispoint,thetelescopewouldbereadytobereturnedtoservice.
However, Hubble did not return to service the next day, as NASA had anticipated. When NASA
attempted to bring Hubble to life for the baseline tests, the SIC&DH unit shut down shortly
thereafter; and the instruments went back into safemode. Hubble had just experienced a failover
fault.
Fortunately, the Hubble team was able to get a memory dump from the SIC&DH so it could
analyze what had gone wrong. It turned out that the SIC&DH had stopped receiving “I’m alive”
messagesfromtheinstrumentsandhadshutthemdownbyplacingthemintosafemode.
The Hubble team had updated the data-handling protocols when theyfirst brought Side B online.
Was it possible that these new protocols were flawed? Or was there some more fundamental
hardwarefailurethatmightpreventHubblefromcomingbacktolife?
The Success
As it turned out, the problem was with a power supply that
caused the instruments to misbehave. The ground crew
studied this problem for several days as they did not want
to harm the instruments. Finally, they were able to correct
the low-voltage problem; and Hubble went online on
October 25th. The SDF failure had left Hubble inoperative
for four weeks, but it was now returning spectacular
images.
At this point, NASA decided to replace the failed SDF with
a spare unit that fortunately had been built with the other
twounitsandhadbeenstoredatGoddardforsafekeeping.
Apairofgravitationallyinteractinggalaxies
In this way, full redundancy would be restored to the
calledArp147,takenjustafterHubblewas
telescope’s instrument control system, which would be restoredtooperationinOctober,2008.
accomplished on the delayed service mission. This was
the first computer problem to require the replacement of a component since Hubble was
launched.
The Future
The final shuttle mission is now rescheduled to launch on May 12, 2009. Atlantis will take the
replacement SDF to Hubble, where it will be installed during a space walk bythe astronauts. The
currentlyoperationalSideBwillcontinuetocontrolHubble’sinstruments,andtherepairedSideA
will act as its backup. The astronauts also will install upgraded and new instruments – the tasks
thathadbeenplannedforthenow-delayedOctobermission.
Until the replacement unit is installed, Hubble is running without a spare instrument controller. If
any unit should fail, the entire SIC&DH will fail. There is no Side C to which to fail over. Why is
3
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

there such a long delayfrom the decision in October to replace the SDF and the Maymission? It
turnsoutthatthereisalotofworktodobeforehand.
First, the SDF replacement unit must be exhaustively tested to ensure that it can withstand the
vibration of launch and the ravages of high radiation and low temperatures in space. In addition,
the astronauts must be trained in the replacement of the unit; and the mission must be totally
replanned.
NASA estimates that this should give Hubble another five to ten years of life, enough to carry it
past the launch of the next space telescope, the James Webb Space Telescope. However, the
Webbtelescopewillnotbe adirectreplacementforHubble.It willfocusontheinfraredspectrum.
WhenHubblefinallydies,itsvisibleandultravioletviewoftheuniversewillbegone.
As a final note, an IMAX camera will be carried on Atlantis to record the repair. This footage will
be added to footage taken by another IMAX camera when Hubble was launched in 1990 and
again on the Endeavour servicing mission in 1993. The Hubble IMAX documentary is scheduled
forreleaseinearly2010.
A “Lessons Learned” Vacuum
There is not much in the way of lessons that can be learned by us Earth-bound IT technicians
from Hubble’s experience. Space computing simply has challenges that we not in NASA may
neverunderstand.
ThefactthattheinstrumentcontrolcomputerhadanMTBF(meantimebeforefailure)of18years
isphenomenal,especiallygiventhefactthatitwasdesignedandbuiltoverthirtyyearsago!
Thelongfailoverofthreeweeks(plusanadditionalweek duetothefailoverfault) wasdueinpart
to the fact that the backup Side B had to remain in an unpowered state so that it would not
deteriorate in the hostile space radiation and temperature environment. Furthermore, it had to be
thoroughlytestedfromthegroundbeforeitcouldbeputintoservice.
An MTR (meantimetorepair) of eight months for the SDF failed unit is certainlytroublesomebut
understandable given that the SDF failure was an unscheduled event and that a Shuttle mission
hadtobeplannedaroundit
In today’s technology, one improvement that perhaps could be made (and probably is being
made) infuturespacesystems is infailover time. Iffailover couldbeperformedautomaticallyand
controlled by onboard logic, it perhaps could be fairly rapid. Of course, one probably cannot
periodicallytestfailover –thatmightbetoodangerous.Wejusthaveto takeour chances when a
fault occurs and have built in the monitoring and command procedures to overcome a failover
fault–acapabilitywell-exhibitedbyHubble.
Another improvement would be to implement triple redundancy. If a module should fail, it can be
replacedandstillhaveabackup.Thisis,infact,thepracticeintheInternationalSpaceStation.1
1TripleRedundancyFailureontheSpaceStation,AvailabilityDigest;November,2007.
4
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

References
Information for this article was taken from the September and October, 2008, issues of
Computerworld, Scientific American, The Register, Florida Today, Space Ref, freep.com, Space
Daily,EfluxMedian,ArsTechnica,CNNNews,andtheNASAHubbleTelescopeStatusUpdate.
Material was also obtained from the December, 2008, and January, 2009, issues of
Computerworld,CBCNews,andSpaceDaily.
TheWikipediaHubbleentrycontributedtothisarticle.
5
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
