The Dawn of Fault-Tolerant Computing
April2016
In 1980, I published a four-part series in Computerworld entitled “Survivable Systems.”
Thearticles describedthe state-of-the-artfault-tolerantsystems atthetime.Theneedfor
systems that never (at least, hardly ever) failed was just being recognized. Several
companies jumped in with their own versions of fault-tolerant systems, including Tandem, Stratus,
Synapse,Auragen,August,NoHalt,ParallelComputers,andTolerantSystems.
A lot has changed over the 36 years. Systems have become more “open,” with Linux-like operating
systems and x86-based hardware architectures. However, what hasn’t changed is the need for systems
that never fail. Applications that were hardly in use in the 1980s now are becoming mission-critical. The
use of email is a perfect example. With the advent of social media, systems promoted as 24x7 can’t risk
a failure. As soon as a system is under distress, the Twitter universe explodes with complaints and
comments,oftencausingirreparableharmtoacompany’sreputationforreliability.
Some early products are still in use, for instance, Tandem and Stratus systems. Others have been
incorporatedintonewerproducts.Stillotherssimplyhavedisappeared.Inthis article,wevisitthedawnof
fault-tolerantcomputersandthevariousarchitecturesthatwerebeingpromotedassuchatthetime.
Tandem Computers, Inc.
The Tandem computer was the granddaddy of fault-tolerant systems. Tandem’s first system was
delivered in 1976. Forty years later, its original architecture remains the dominant fault-tolerant
technology. Then and now, a Tandem system was a loosely coupled multiprocessor system that
contained anywhere from two to sixteen independent processors in a node. Up to 255 nodes could be
includedinasinglenetwork,linkedviaTandem’sExpandcommunicationnetwork.
1
©2016SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

The processors in a node were linked via a duplexed, interprocessor messaging bus called the Dynabus,
capableofa26megabyte/seconddatarate.
All device controllers were dual-ported so that there was always a path to a device even if a processor
failed.Allcriticalprocessesranasprocesspairsintwodifferentprocessors.Oneprocesswastheprimary
process, and one was the backup process. The primary process kept its backup process synchronized
viacheckpointingmessages.Shouldthe primaryprocess fail(presumablydue to a processor failure),the
backup process took over and continued processing with no apparent interruption to the user. (Tandem’s
later inclusion of the Pathway process monitor eliminated the need for application programmers to write
checkpointedprocesspairs.)
With Tandem’s second release of its product, the Tandem NS2, each processor could be configured with
two megabytes of memory. Each mirrored disk pair could provide 128 megabytes of memory (yes, that’s
megabytes,notgigabytes).
Tandem was acquired by Compaq in 1997, which then was acquired by HP in 2002. Tandem computers
are now known as HPE NonStop computers. (HPE is HP Enterprise, one of the two companies that
resulted from the split in 2015 of Hewlett Packard into HP, Inc., which sells HP personal computers and
printers,andHPE,whichmarketsHPserver,storage,andnetworkingsystems.)
Stratus Computer, Inc.
Founded in 1980, Stratus Computer, Inc. (now Stratus Technologies, Inc.1) marketed a system that was
similartotheTandem system inthatitwasanexpandablemultiprocessorsystem.However,thesimilarity
ended there. Stratus achieved with closely-coupled hardware what Tandem achieved with loosely-
coupledsoftware.
Each Stratus processing module comprised four Motorola 68000 microprocessors. Introduced in 1967,
theM68000architectureisstillinusetoday,almostfourdecadeslater.
A Stratus CPU board contained two such microprocessors running in lockstep. The outputs of the two
microprocessors were continuously compared. As long as they behaved identically, their outputs drove a
pair of high-speed buses that communicated with other modules in the system. However, should a
difference be detected in the outputs of the two microprocessors, the board was shut down immediately.
Thus,theCPUwouldnotpropagateanybadresult.
CPU CPU
M68000 = M68000 M68000 = M68000
memory memory
disk disk
disk disk
controller controller
comm. comm.
controller controller
Stratus
1In1998,StratusComputer,Inc.waspurchasedbyAscendCommunicationsforitscommunicationproducts.Theenterpriseserver
portionofthebusinesswasspunofftotheoriginalfoundersin1999.ThenewcompanywasnamedStratusTechnologies,Inc.
2
©2016SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

To provide fault tolerance, two CPU boards drove the pair of buses. As long as both boards functioned
properly, the buses were driven with the same signals from each board. However, if a fault was detected
in one of the boards, the board would be shut down. The surviving board continued to provide the
processingfunctionsforthesystem.
This philosophyof hardware self-checking and redundancy was carried throughout the rest of the system
via dual memories, dual disk controllers, and dual communication controllers. Multiple processing
modules could be linked together via a simplexed or duplexed 2.8 megabyte/second interprocessor bus
called the StrataLink. Each Stratus processor could be configured with four megabytes of memory and
sixtymegabytesofmirroreddisk.
Over the years, Stratus’ lockstep technology evolved to become its ftServer. Stratus also introduced a
softwaresolution,Avance,whichusedtwogeneral-purposex86servers that werekeptsynchronizedwith
synchronous replication. Avance was replaced later by Marathon’s everRun system when Stratus
acquiredMarathonin2012.
In addition to these systems, in the early 1980s Stratus introduced the VOS operating system running on
its high-performance Continuum hardware. VOS was a Multics-like operating system, and Continuum
faulttolerancewasachievedwithdualprocessorsrunninginlockstep.StratussincehasportedVOStoits
ftServers.Interestingly,mycompany,TheSombers Group, was contractedbyTandem intheearly1980s
to compare the performance of VOS with the Tandem TXP system. . Their performances were
substantially identical. However, Stratus’ focus then and now remains within the market for smaller x86-
basedsolutions.
Synapse Computer Corporation
Synapse Computer Corporation took an approach strikingly different from that taken by Tandem and
Stratus. Rather than providing virtually instant recovery from afailure, Synapse took the view that a short
delay in recovery was acceptable provided the database was not corrupted. Synapse argued that it was
perfectly acceptable to have the users wait a minute or two while the system recovered and then to
require the users to reenter the transactions that were in progress at the time of failure. Back then, this
wascalleda“missioncriticalsolution.”Canyouimaginetryingtosellitin2016?
The Synapse architecture was a closely coupled configuration. Up to 28 general-purpose or I/O
processors could be connected to a dual 32 megabyte/second bus. The processors communicated via a
shared memory also connected to the dual buses. Thus, interprocessor communication was much faster
thanfortheTandemandStratussystems,bothofwhichreliedoninterprocessmessaging.
Also, processes were not assigned to processors. Rather, all processors shared a common task queue.
Whenaprocessorbecameidle,itbeganprocessingthenexttask onthequeue.Ahighlyefficientcaching
mechanism allowed processors to access data anywhere, even if it were in the cache of another
processor.
The Synapse system was certainly not fault-tolerant in the sense of Tandem and Stratus. If a memory
module failed, every executing process in the system could be affected. If a general-purpose processor
failed,everyprocessrunninginthatprocessorfailed.
Synapse depended upon a transaction model to recover from failure. Transactions were checkpointed as
each new screen was presented to a user. If a failure occurred, the entire system was brought to a halt
and was reconfigured around the failure. The database was recovered to ensure its consistency.
Database recovery was accomplished via a History Log, which contained all before and after images of
datachangesmadetothedisks.Transactionsthenwererestartedfromtheirlastcheckpoints.
3
©2016SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

shared
memory
general . . . general I/O I/O I/O
purpose purpose processor processor processor
processor processor
disk
controller comm.
controller
disk
disk
comm.
disk controller
controller
Synapse
A Synapse system used Motorola 68000 microprocessors. It could be configured with six megabytes of
memoryand300megabytesofdiskstorage.
ThecloselycoupledarchitectureofSynapsesystemsneverwasacceptedasafault-tolerantsolution,and
Synapsesystemsnolongeraresold.
Auragen Systems Corp.
Auragen’s fault-tolerant offering was in many respects a hybrid combination of the loosely coupled
architectureusedbyTandemandthecloselycoupledarchitectureusedbyStratus.Itcomprisedfrom2to
32 processor clusters connected to a dual-system bus, each with a 16 megabyte/second capacity.
Devices connected to the processor clusters via dual-ported controllers so that there was an access path
toeverydeviceevenintheeventofaprocessorfailure.
A processor cluster was a closely coupled system comprising an executive processor and two work
processors, all of which were Motorola 68000 microprocessors. The processors in a processor cluster
were interconnected with shared memory and device controllers via a 20 megabyte/second bus. The
4
©2016SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

executive processor was responsible for all operating-system functions. The work processors were
independentfromeachotherandrantheapplications.
Theprocessorclusterswerenotfault-tolerant.Rather,faulttolerance wasachievedinamannersimilarto
Tandem systems. Each process had a backup process running in another processor cluster, and the
backup process was kept synchronized with the primary process via checkpointing. However,
checkpointing was taken care of automatically by the processor clusters. All communication between
processes was via interprocess messages. All interprocess messages directed to the primary process
also were queued to the backup process. Periodically, the backup process would be synchronized with
theprimaryprocess;anditsqueueofmessageswouldbeerased.
Should the active process fail, the backup process replayed all of the messages in its queue. During the
replay, outgoing interprocess messages were inhibited to prevent duplicates. Following the completion of
theinterprocess-messagereplay,thebackupprocesswasreadytotakeoverprocessingwheretheactive
processleftoff.
Auragenwasinvoluntarilydissolvedin1985.
August Systems
The August system was unique in that it provided fault tolerance for both digital and analog signals. It
comprised a loosely coupled, triplexed voting system using triple modular redundant (TMR) technology.
Three independent paths were provided through the system, and their results were compared. If one
result was different from the other results, it was discarded. The common result was passed on as the
correctoutput.
The August system comprised three 8086-based Control Computer Modules (CCMs) that communicated
with each other over read-only interprocessor buses. Each CCM received inputs from the Processor
Interface Module (PIM) and made its own calculations. The results were compared via the interprocessor
buses. If a CCM found itself outvoted, it adjusted its results to comply with the other two modules. If a
CCMfounditselfconsistentlyoutvoted,itdeclareditselfoutofservice.
5
©2016SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Each CCM returned its response to the PIM, which itself voted on the results and returned the majority
result to the outside world. Analog inputs were digitized via analog-to-digital (A/D) converters. For analog
output signals, the digitized values were reconverted to analog values; and the median value was
returnedastheresult.
The PIM provided input and output redundancy for digital and analog signals. Input redundancy was
provided by distributing input signals to all three CCMs. The output circuits were fault-tolerant. If any
componentopenedorshorted,thevoterstillfunctionedproperly.
EachCCMcouldbeconfiguredwith128kilobytesofmemory.
In1997,AugustSystemswaspurchasedbyABB,aZurich,Switzerland-basedcompanyoperatingmainly
in robotics and the power and automation technology areas. The August system is now known as the
ABBTriguardTMRproduct.Ithasover1,000systemsinstalledworldwidewithover10millionoperational
hours.
NoHalt Computers, Inc.
NoHalt Computers aimed at the low end of the market. Its system
comprised a mirrored database with up to sixteen 8-bit Zilog Z80 work
processors interconnected by a pair of 1.25 megabyte/sec.
interprocessorbuses.
Mirrored files were implemented via a pair of file processors that were
independently powered and that managed their own disk units. They
communicatedwiththeworkprocessorsviatheinterprocessorbuses.
Each work processor could support up to four peripheral devices such
as terminals, modems, or printers. However, the work processors were
notmultitasking.Theyeachcouldperformonlyonetaskatatime.
In the event of a file-processor failure, the surviving processor
continued to support the system. In the event of a work-processor
failure,allperipheralsconnectedtothatprocessorwereoutofservice.
Each file or work processor could be configured with 64K of memory.
Thesystemcouldbeconfiguredwith140megabytesofmirroreddisk.
NoHalt Computers was acquired by TPC Logistics Services, Inc., and
the NoHalt product was renamed the Reliant fault-tolerant computer
system. In 1984, TPC announced the Reliant product had been
enhanced to support 16-bit 8086 microprocessors.
6
©2016SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Parallel Computers, Inc.
Based on Motorola 68000 microprocessors, the Parallel Computer system could connect up to five
parallel processing units (PPUs) to a simplexed interprocessor bus. Up to four disk controllers and two
communication line controllers also could be connected to the bus to communicate with the parallel
processingunits.Thediskcontrollerssupportedmirroreddiskpairs.
Each PPU was a duplexed fault-tolerant computer. A process in a PPU ran independently in each half.
Periodically, the process pairs were synchronized. Thus, if one side of a PPU failed, the other side could
carryontheprocessorfunctionsinamannertransparenttotheuser.
EachPPUcouldcontainonemegabyteofmemory.
In 1988, Parallel Computers was acquired by IMP, a British computer company. According to an IMP
cofounder,IMPacquiredParallelComputerstogainentryintotheU.S.computermarketplace.
Tolerant Systems
Tolerant Systems provided a series of System Building Blocks
(SSBs) based on the National 32032 microprocessor. The
SSBs could be arranged in a variety of ways by the user to
achievedesiredfunctionsandlevelsofredundancy.
In a typical system, SSBs were used as communication
servers to process requests from the users and to return
responses, as application servers to process the transactions,
and as file servers to access and update the database. In
general, multiple servers of each type were available for
redundancy.
Fault tolerance was based on transactions. The
communication servers maintained a log of all incomplete
transactions,andthefileserversmaintainedthebeforeimages
of all incomplete updates. Should a server fail, its load was
transferred to a like surviving server. All transactions being
handled by the failed server were aborted, and the
corresponding partial database updates were rolled back via
7
©2016SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

the before images maintained by the file servers. Those transactions then were replayed from the
communicationserverlogsandenabledfullrecoverytransparenttotheuserexceptforatimedelay.
Tolerant Systems was renamed Veritas Software Corporation in 1989. After developing several new
applications, Veritas went public in 1993 at a value of USD $64 million. Veritas subsequently was
acquired by Symantec Corporation in 2005. Symantic produces software for security, storage, backup
andavailability
Summary
Following Tandem Computer’s successful entry into the fault-tolerant server field, numerous companies
attemptedtofollow.Ofthem,Stratuswasthemostsuccessful.Otherswereabsorbedornolongerexist.
After the success of Tandem and Stratus, IBM introduced its Parallel Sysplex fault-tolerant system in
1994. Today, most large mission-critical systems are powered either by Tandem (now HPE NonStop) or
byIBM.Mission-criticalsystemsontheedge(suchasinsalesoffices)arelargelymanagedbyStratus.
Much of the fault-tolerant technology we discuss here mayseem woefullyoutdated. However, forty years
after it was introduced, the Tandem NonStop architecture remains the same. That is simply amazing.
Back when Tandem and similar systems were first introduced, there was no Internet. There was no Big
Data. Cloud computing? Huh? From that perspective, what should we infer will be the scope of IT four
decades from today? Will fault tolerance remain relevant or even exist? What we do know for certain is
that the past is an indicator of future innovation and evolution. As such, appreciating the dawn of fault-
tolerantcomputingwillshapeouranticipationofwhatliesahead.
8
©2016SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com