– Our April Twitter Feed of Outages
April 2017
A challenge every issue for the Availability Digest is to determine which of the many
availability topics out there win coveted status as Digest articles. We always regret not
focusing our attention on the topics we bypass. With our new Twitter presence, we don’t
have to feel guilty. This article highlights some of the tweets that made headlines in
recent days.
How Utilities Are Using Blockchain to Modernize the Grid
In the U.S. state of New York, neighbors are testing their ability to sell solar energy to one
another using blockchain technology. In Austria, the country’s largest utility conglomerate, Wien
Energie, is taking part in a blockchain trial focused on energy trading with two other utilities.
Meanwhile in Germany, the power company Innogy is running a pilot to see if blockchain technology
can authenticate and manage the billing process for autonomous electric-vehicle charging stations.
Blockchain has grabbed the attention of the heavily regulated power industry as it braces for an
energy revolution in which both utilities and consumers will produce and sell electricity.
https://t.co/ItENELBelr
Archive or backup – now that’s the question!
It is easy to confuse archiving with backup – and no wonder. Both activities are broadly related to
data protection, but they each serve two very different purposes. Which is why, before deciding
which approach to take, your first step should be to figure out exactly what your organisation
requires and why. In other words, what is the use case?
https://t.co/hd6SuUASQ3
Google and Symantec go to war over our Internet security
Google and Symantec are engaged in a war about each other's security practices, with all of us
caught in the crossfire. Google believes that Symantec has been improperly issuing security
certificates for tens of thousands of websites. If the search engine follows through with its threat,
Chrome will soon no longer place the same level of trust in Symantec's certificates.
https://t.co/xIoyuslB3k
1
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Amazon Web Services fixes 't2.micro instances' capacity issues affecting London data
centres
Amazon Web Services (AWS) has fixed a capacity issue affecting one of its instances. The issue
had prevented users from using a particular service. The capacity issue affected t2.micro
instances; but the Amazon insists that its London data centres, which only opened in December
2016, are not suffering from capacity issues. According to sources who contacted V3, attempts to
expand their usage in the EU-West-2a zone had been rebuffed due to capacity issues: "We
currently do not have sufficient t2.micro capacity in the Availability Zone you requested (eu-west-
2a)."
https://t.co/BfKrfuIvvY
Bringing Legacy Control to the Internet of Things
When it comes to implementing the Internet of Things concept as a means of collecting data for
analysis, the manufacturing and processing industries are better suited than most others. The
reason for this is that the Internet of Things requires an essential ingredient—data. And that’s
something the manufacturing and processing industries have always had in abundance because of
their vast base of installed sensors, controllers and actuators. However, therein lies the problem.
https://t.co/dx1UJfp9se
Oracle Cloud Plugs into Smart Grid
In an ongoing effort to boost its share of the public cloud market, Oracle has rolled out a cloud
service geared toward the smart grid and Internet of Things device management. The Oracle Utilities
Operational Device Cloud Service announced at a recent company event looks to boost automation
of smart grid infrastructure and IoT device management.
https://t.co/SeRAm6DiVX
Saks self-leaked customer data unencrypted, violating multiple rules
With so many retailers being impacted by cyber attacks, it’s easy to conclude that thieves are
necessary for data breaches. Not necessarily. Saks in March made clear that it can breach itself
quite efficiently.
https://t.co/Kx86fqwgZ6
Disaster recovery: How is your business set up to survive an outage?
Asynchronous vs synchronous. Dark disaster recovery vs. active architecture. Active/active vs.
active/passive. No setup is objectively better or worse than another. The best one for you primarily
depends on your level of tolerance for what happens when the server goes down.
https://t.co/M6wVRFcnhg
Google to Symantec: We don't trust you anymore
Security teams, network administrators, and operations teams have busy days ahead. Google’s
Chrome development team is fed up with Symantec as a certificate authority and has announced
plans to no longer trust current Symantec certificates.
https://t.co/b89TOhOBXk
2
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

World War Three, by Mistake
On June 3, 1980, at about two-thirty in the morning, computers at the National Military Command
Center beneath the Pentagon, at the headquarters of the North American Air Defense Command
(NORAD) deep within Cheyenne Mountain, Colorado, and at Site R, the Pentagon’s alternate
command post center hidden inside Raven Rock Mountain, Pennsylvania, issued an urgent warning:
the Soviet Union had just launched a nuclear attack on the United States. The Soviets had recently
invaded Afghanistan, and the animosity between the two superpowers was greater than at any other
time since the Cuban Missile Crisis.
https://t.co/EEJH1MmJND
Backup vs. Business Continuity: Using RTO to Better Plan for Your Business
In this white paper, TechMD discusses what’s at stake when it comes to not just protecting but also
managing your data (hint: your business). The authors explain why it’s important to think in terms of
business continuity rather than simply data backup. They look at how to calculate the all-important
Recovery Time Objective (RTO) and Recovery Point Objective (RPO) so that you can get what you
need from your business continuity vendor.
https://t.co/8yBf6nhAdR
The End of Backup
Like insurance policies, backups are expensive; and they don’t add any additional functionality. Your
car doesn’t go any faster because you’re insured, and your production system doesn’t run any better
with backup. As many IT professionals have discovered too late, backups also are unreliable, a
situation made even worse by the fact that bad backups typically aren’t discovered until there’s a
need to restore. Fortunately, backup as we have known it is ending. Significant improvements in
virtualization, synchronization and replication have converged to deliver production systems that
incorporate point-in-time recovery and data protection as an integral component. These new data
protection technologies are no longer engaged only when a system fails. Instead, they run constantly
within live production systems.
https://t.co/WQkswpQHFK
NYSE glitch sends traders scrambling as ETF auctions derailed
NYSE Arca, the largest U.S. listing venue for ETFs, left traders scrambling at the end of a trading
day in mid-March after a system upgrade went awry. An upgraded version of its software went live
and derailed closing auctions for certain securities, a key moment at the end of the trading day.
The exchange shifted to backup methods for calculating the closing prices for most names and went
back to using an old version of its software, according to an email to clients. A total of 341 symbols
did not complete their closing auctions.
https://t.co/8iET646F6c
3
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

How the Sun messes with your TV, radio and internet
A sun outage is when the energy from the Sun disrupts the signal from a satellite. All satellites can
be affected by sun outages, but geostationary satellites are particularly vulnerable. These satellites
orbit the equator at an altitude of about 36,000 kilometres and take 24 hours to complete an orbit.
That means from the ground, they appear to be stationary in the sky. Geostationary satellites
provide a wide variety of services — including TV and radio broadcasts, telecommunications, and for
regional and remote parts of Australia, the Internet. But when the Sun traverses the equator during
an equinox, it also passes briefly behind geostationary satellites – about 10 minutes at most. But that
10 minutes is enough to degrade or completely disrupt radio and television broadcasts as well as
satellite Internet.
https://t.co/I9tANLaCJo
Microsoft Probes Cause of Global Web Outage
Microsoft’s massive outage in mid-March disrupted user access to Office 365, Skype, Xbox Live and
other online services, in some cases for more than 16 hours. The outage, which affected large
swaths of the U.S. and Europe, was the second that month of Microsoft’s online services; though a
disruption on March 7 only lasted about an hour. Unclear is how or if the outages were related to a
simultaneous problem with Azure cloud.
https://t.co/WRDWzXnQZH
The Internet of bad things
On a Tuesday evening in late September 2016, Brian Krebs, one of the Internet's most prominent
cybercrime reporters, noticed a startling surge in his blog traffic. It did not take him long to realize
that he was under attack. Someone had seized control of hundreds of thousands of internet-
connected devices, including home routers, video cameras, DVRs, and printers, to create abotnet, a
sort of digital zombie army. Instead of performing their normal functions, these various devices, all of
which were capable of transmitting data to the Internet, obeyed a command to pummel the server
that hosted Krebs' blog. The assault, called a distributed denial of service, or DDoS attack,
overwhelmed the server and knocked Krebs' blog off the Internet for three days.
https://t.co/HxveQtRMXA
African governments learn to block the Internet
Since 2015, about a dozen African countries have had wide-ranging Internet shutdowns, often
during elections. Rights defenders say the blackouts are conducive to carrying out serious abuses.
The Internet outages also can inflict serious damage on the economies of African countries that
desperately seek growth. In February 2016, amid a tight election, Ugandan authorities shut down
access to Facebook and Twitter as anger swelled over delayed delivery of ballots in opposition
strongholds. During the blackout, the police arrested the president’s main challenger. Over $2 million
was shed from the country’s GDP in just five days of internet restrictions.
https://t.co/Ta0ke4eQ7P
4
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Another 911 outage. Does any accountability exist?
AT&T Wireless customers who tried to reach 911 in the evening hours of Wednesday, March 8,
were left stranded in more than a dozen major U.S. cities. Based on unconfirmed but widespread
reports, the problem may have affected callers nationwide. What failed? The public may never know.
https://t.co/A6XihK8B5S
AWS Outage: Implications for Internet, Enterprise Cloud Customers
February’s hours-long Amazon Web Services (AWS) outage provided a vivid illustration of how
much large parts of the Internet depend on the cloud service. It also presented a puzzle for many
users: because the AWS health dashboard itself depends on the cloud service, the status messages
failed to indicate any signs of trouble throughout the outage.
https://t.co/kP3RSAwIXI
Jersey City neighborhood's Internet outage enters 2nd week
Residents of Jersey City's (New Jersey USA) Liberty Harbor neighborhood are on their eighth day
of an Internet outage that is affecting residents of the area and some local businesses.
