High-Performance IT Services
August2016
“High-Performance IT Services” by Dr. Terry Critchley (Auerbach Publications, 2016)
is an extensive and easy-to-read explanation of IT system performance issues and
approaches where Critchley’s four decades of IT experience are clearlyevident. Most books on this topic
dwell heavily on the mathematics behind system performance. This is perhaps useful for those
specializing in performance enhancements, but they represent a level of detail that is over-the-head of
line-of-businessITmanagersandtheirstaffs.
Instead, Dr. Critchley focuses on explaining these concepts in simple
English, supportedbynumerous figures. As he demonstrates,a clear figure
can explain to the layman the meaning of a complex set of equations
without needing to be a mathematical genius. This is not to say that he
ignores the mathematics of system performance, such as the all-important
theory of queues. Rather, he confines the math to a segregated set of
chaptersandappendicesthatarearbitraryreadingforthosethatwanttodig
deeper.
He begins by discussing what is meant by performance. Performance can
have many faces depending upon the application, whether it be transaction
processing, batch processing, web services, or any one of a number of
other uses. He points out that average response time is not a sufficient
metric. Rather, the spread of response times is equally important. An
average response time of one second is not very good if 90% of all
responsescompletein20seconds.
Amajorfocusofthebook isonnetworksanddistributedsystemssincesystemstodaydonotoperateina
privatesilo.Theymustinteractwithothersystems,andoverallperformanceisstronglyimpactedbythese
systemsandtheabilitytoefficientlycommunicatewiththem.
He dwells heavily on service level agreements (SLAs) and on the wide variety of formal benchmarks that
are used in the industry. He includes in his discussions cloud computing, virtualization and high
performancecomputing.
This book is for everyone in IT. It is especially useful for performance rookies who can learn a great deal
from the book. It should be read by those who know quite a bit about system performance but who can
always learn more. The book is for IT managers, IT staff, system operators, and system programmers.
Even Chief Technical Officers in an organization can gain important insight into the performance of the
systemstheirpeoplemanageanduponwhichtheenterprisedepends.
1
©2016SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

A very detailed Table of Contents (with several headings on each page) makes it easy to scan the book
and decide which sections are of interest. Each section typically stands on its own, so that the book
servesmoreasareferencelibrarythanasatreatiseonperformance.
All in all, Dr. Critchley’s book is a complete discussion of system performance fundamentals with the
addedadvantagethatonecangodirectlytotheissuesthatconcernhimorher.
2
©2016SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com