Cyber intrusion or IT single point of failure? https://www.
Whether directed at governments or businesses, there are headlines about cyber intrusions virtually
every day. Rather than publicly admit the cyber intrusion, victimised companies often claim that the
Information Technology (IT) data centre actually stopped working because one component failed – a
condition known as a ‘single point of failure’. Why cyber intrusion and not attack?
https://t.co/fh5iwbEfh7
Metro's $80m back-up system may have failed at moment Melbourne needed it
The $80 million back-up system for Melbourne's rail network may have triggered the glitch that
recently brought down the city's train system, stranding or delaying an estimated 175,000
passengers. Metro's state-of-the-art Disaster Recovery Site contains hundreds of servers in a secure
environment with uninterruptible power and is the last line of defence for Melbourne's rail
commuters. But it failed at the precise moment it was needed, plunging the city into chaos on the
cusp of the evening peak.
https://t.co/yOqLqzrkTP
Severe thunderstorm to blame for problem with Canada's 'flight plan system': Nav
Canada
The organization responsible for air traffic control in Canadian airspace says a severe thunderstorm
in mid-July in Ottawa was to blame for an outage affecting its automated flight planning system.
Nav Canada president Neil R. Wilson said in a statement that the water flooded one of its facilities
shortly after midnight, affecting the network that handles flight plans and requiring staff to evacuate
to a nearby facility where back-up systems are located.
https://t.co/4Jv3CKXt1B
6
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Lock your doors, people: Verizon breach on unsecured AWS server exposes 14M
customer records
Storing files on public cloud services is one of the most secure ways to protect your data, so long as
you actually secure it. A contractor working for Verizon recently exposed 14 million customer
records, including phone numbers and PINs that would grant account access, after leaving the data
unprotected on one of Amazon Web Services’ servers. That contractor, who is most likely no longer
working for Nice Systems, set up an AWS S3 server to store the records as part of a project they
were working on for Verizon but left the information “downloadable by anyone with the easy-to-guess
web address.”
https://t.co/Wm2uzatO0x
15 famous ERP disasters, dustups and disappointments
You can find out how crucial an enterprise resource planning (ERP) software rollout can be for a
company from a single word: billions—lawsuits over failed ERP and customer relationship
management (CRM) implementations are now being denominated in the billions of dollars.
https://t.co/OQ0fbcPch1
Massive Valley blackout again puts spotlight on L.A.'s failing infrastructure
The explosion at a Northridge power plant that left 140,000 customers across the San Fernando
Valley without electricity in July was a major blow to Los Angeles’ power grid. The size of a large
truck, the high-voltage transformer that was destroyed was more than 40 years old.
https://t.co/Pwi1uqlfyV
GDPR: Protect your data, recover more quickly
On 25th May 2018, the European Union’s General Data Protection Regulations (GDPR) will come
into force. Despite the Brexit negotiations, UK companies will have to comply with GDPR; and Article
5 of the regulations requires companies to take particular care of personal, sensitive data. It
obligates that data must be “processed in a manner that ensure appropriate security of the personal
data, including protection against unauthorised or unlawful processing and against accidental loss,
destruction or damage, using appropriate technical measures.” Organisations therefore need to
ensure that compliance is upheld by conducting regular audits and by being aware of the biggest
threats to their businesses.
https://t.co/YLCrvR0TwH
Amazon Patents Detail Drone Fulfilment Center, Propellers That Change Sound
The pursuit of commercialized drone delivery doesn’t seem to be slowing in the U.S. More than one
recently-published patent application by Amazon focuses on an area related to drone delivery.
Three patents, which were initially filed at the end of 2015 and recently published by the U.S. Patent
& Trademark Office, include a fulfilment center for drones, a motor failure backup design and a
system to dynamically modify the natural sound of drones in flight.
https://t.co/ObCSbM2N2M
7
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

From the Availability Digest: British Airways Downed by Fat Finger and Testing
Shortsightedness
Say it ain’t so, British Airways. On Saturday, May 27, a systems crash in a British Airways (BA) data
center caused a massive disruption of air travel at Heathrow and Gatwick Airports and at airports in
70 countries. The outage was caused by human error. We often refer to such an event as a “fat
finger” blunder. A technician mistakenly turned off the UPS system in BA’s active data center and
shut down all of BA’s servers. Unfortunately, British Airways suffered from a syndrome that exists in
many organizations. BA never had fully tested its failover capabilities to the backup data center.
https://t.co/RZOZ2nkdnr
Be Proactive in Data Center Earthquake Mitigation
Of all the natural disasters that can affect data centers, earthquakes are among the most damaging.
Given the data center industry’s continued growth and expansion throughout California, these
potentially catastrophic events are always top of mind for data center owners and operators.
With the passing of the 27th anniversary of the 6.9-magnitude Loma Prieta earthquake, centered
within 10 miles of Santa Cruz, now is the time for data centers across California and other areas
prone to seismic activity to reevaluate their earthquake disaster strategies and look at the availability
of proactive protection plans.
https://t.co/UbV98CkgFF
Check your provider’s data center rating
If you don’t consider the cleanliness of a restaurant when choosing where to eat, it will cost you.
Eating at an unsanitary restaurant can impact your health, make you sick and, in some cases, kill
you. There is a standard way to measure restaurant cleanliness, so why not data center
performance? Infrastructure Masons’ founder Dean Nelson has proposed the Data Center
Performance Index. DCPI uses simple performance grades in three categories: Availability,
Efficiency and Environmental.
https://t.co/jic9QXdOGV
BBC News - Somalia internet outage is 'major disaster'
Somalia's government says an ongoing internet outage is costing the country $10m (£7.7m) each day.
The outage affects southern Somalia and was caused by damage to an undersea fibre-optic cable in late
June.
https://t.co/eoRwANOp64
IBM Says This Breakthrough Will Breathe New Life into Moore's Law
IBM, GlobalFoundries, and Samsung said recently that they have found a way to make thinner
transistors, which should enable them to pack 30 billion switches onto a microprocessor chip the
size of a fingernail. The tech industry has been fueled for decades by the ability of chipmakers to
shoehorn ever smaller, faster transistors into the chips that power laptops, servers, and mobile
devices. But industry watchers have worried lately that technology was pushing the limits of Moore's
Law—a prediction made by Intel co-founder Gordon Moore in 1965 that chips could double in power
every two years or less.
https://t.co/cv1dKYssow
8
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Norway’s Largest Wind Farm to Power Google Data Centers
A new wind farm in Norway will begin providing electricity to tech giant Google in September. The
50-turbine Tellenes wind farm will produce 160 MW of power – making it the biggest facility of its
kind in Norway and Google’s largest in Europe.
https://t.co/X0N5RVpp44
6 reasons why IT recoveries fail
The top 6 reasons why recoveries fail to meet their SLAs are: 1) wrong decision-making at the point of
failure, 2) DR solutions lacking adequate testing, 3) changes in live system not being updated on DR
systems, 4) data volumes and bandwidth restrictions, 5) false DR test reports, and 6) reluctance to invoke
DR solutions.
https://t.co/yuk3L616GJ
Sky and TalkTalk broadband hit by massive ongoing outage
Sky broadband (and phone) users were hit by a major outage in the Sussex area in July, with
TalkTalk subscribers also affected. The cause? Apparently extensive damage was caused to fibre
optic cables by digging works carried out by a third party, who apparently speared some key cables
with a fence post. Seven breaks in fibre cables needed to be repaired.
https://t.co/cbFlnbIFp2
ATO takes systems offline in peak tax period
Mainframe problems forced the Australian Taxation Office to take most of its online portals and
internal processing systems down for maintenance during the first week of 2017 tax time. Customers
began complaining about an inability to access the ATO's myTax system through the myGov portal
around lunchtime. Some reported receiving an "A951.09" error when trying to access the page.
https://t.co/faxbnKuGUR
London Ambulance New Year IT failure blamed on upgrade
The New Year’s Day failure of London Ambulance’s dispatch system, which took the system down
for five hours on its busiest night of the year, has been blamed on a ‘historic upgrade’. Staff had to
switch to pen and paper, and some people had to wait seven hours for an ambulance. One call took
25-minutes to answer, and other calls had to be diverted to Scotland. One person died, possibly as
result of treatment being delayed.
https://t.co/4yKWUQMGgM
Does Britain's Big New Warship Still Run Windows XP?
MS Queen Elizabeth, the Royal Navy's newest vessel and the largest one ever built in the United
Kingdom, is an impressive ship. Nine hundred and nineteen feet long with a crew of 1,600, the ship
can carry up to 40 aircraft. Queen Elizabeth and her sister ship, Prince of Wales, will form the UK's
main expeditionary force at sea, sailing into hotspots with their decks full of F-35 Joint Strike
Fighters. Oh, and Queen Elizabeth also runs Windows XP.
https://t.co/H0ntorgKz5
9
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Machine learning powers Tour de France
Amaury Sport Organisation (A.S.O.), organisers of the Tour de France, and Dimension Data, the
Official Technology Partner of the Tour de France, have announced the use of machine learning
technologies at this year’s Tour de France to give cycling fans across the globe an unprecedented
experience of this year’s event.
https://t.co/A7hQSce4OA
How We'll Safeguard Earth from a Solar Storm Catastrophe
From the fabric of the global economy to families planning tonight’s dinner, communications
networks — and the power grid that underlies them — are woven more tightly through our lives than
ever before. But those networks all could be gone in a flash. A geomagnetic storm triggered by a
burst of solar energy could overwhelm the nation’s power grid and shut down cell towers and
communication networks. Similarly, a human-built electromagnetic pulse (EMP) weapon could
temporarily wipe out the networks that connect and sustain us. Experts are not taking this lightly.
From space-based research about the sun's energy to new efforts that could safeguard power
stations against an attack, science is fighting back to keep our connections open
https://t.co/Dibdr6EGWh
Chase Bank experiences nationwide outages; ATMs, branches, credit cards affected
JPMorgan Chase on July 3rd was hit by significant outages at its branches and throughout its
network, leaving customers unable to access their accounts or money in some cases. The
problems were reported to be the worst in New York, Chicago, Houston, Dallas, Los Angeles,
Florida and Seattle.
https://t.co/ZXdEuaK5bf
Everything you Wanted to Know about World’s First Multi-Turbine Tidal Energy Field
Tidal Energy Company Atlantis is the largest of its kind in Europe. And right now, it is focusing on
completing a four-phased MeyGen Tidal Energy Project on the coasts of Scotland. The project is a
one of a kind Multi-Turbine Tidal Energyfield that will be powering nearly 175,000 Scotland houses
after its completion. The project is in the first phase of its development, but it has already received a
funding of €37 million from EU for its second phase.
https://t.co/fzSe5ZKBeL
Bizarre computer glitch sends technology stocks all crashing to same price
A bizarre computer glitch sent shares in dozens of US technology companies including Apple,
Amazon and Microsoft to the same price in early July, leading some to apparently lose billions in
market value.
https://t.co/NCYgLqPc3a
10
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Tech stocks appear to go nuts after computer glitch
The share prices of Amazon and other major tech companies appeared to go haywire on the eve of
the July 4 holiday after a market data glitch. The confusion arose when some websites incorrectly
showed Amazon (AMZN, Tech30) plummeting 87%, Apple (AAPL, Tech30) dropping 14%,
and Microsoft (MSFT, Tech30) jumping 79% late Monday. U.S. markets had closed early ahead of
the holiday. But the crazy moves weren't the result of wild after-hours trading, according to Nasdaq,
the exchange where the stocks are listed. Nasdaq said the misleading prices came from test data it
sent out that was "improperly" used by third-party companies that supply information to websites.
https://t.co/Bv3i3CTv7f
Cyberattack Fallout Engulfs FedEx, Shuts Terminals and Email
The global cyberattack that wended its way across continents in late June started creating real
consequences at some businesses even as the virus’s spread seemed to be abating.
FedEx Corp. said it could suffer a “material” financial impact after the bug affected the worldwide
operations of its TNT Express delivery unit.
https://t.co/7YcSdtnfy3
Why is Redfin running its site from a single data center without a backup facility?
Redfin surprised a few people when it filed for an initial public offering in July. But inside the
standard boilerplate of risk factors was something even more surprising: Redfin’s entire site is
hosted within a single Seattle data center.
https://t.co/5FEhkpRtsi
Power outage hits multiple Central American countries
A massive power outage recently hit Central America, causing millions of people to lose electricity
for hours. The outage was caused by an overload in the Central American Transmission System in
Panama. Countries affected by the outage included Panama, Costa Rica, Nicaragua, El Salvador,
Honduras, Guatemala and parts of southern Mexico. The countries are all on the same power grid,
which extends approximately 1,130 miles between Panama and Guatemala.
https://t.co/5GF4Idnqmc
11
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

