Reducing Pharmaceutical Pollution
January2013
EveHart
The pharmaceutical industry continues to face challenges in controlling and preventing environmental
pollution.Theindustryisgrowingatarapidpacewithincreasedproductionandacceleratedresearchand
developmentactivities.Withtheindustry’sexpansion,itsimpactontheenvironmentalsoisintensifying.
In order to take preventive measures against pharmaceutical pollution, all manufacturing and distribution
processes must be carefully monitored and controlled. This requires the use of computerized systems to
collect information in real time from potential polluting processes and to report this information to
management in order to assist it in making decisions using up-to-date information. These systems must
be highly available (four nines and beyond), as a serious lapse in reporting may have a devastating
environmentalimpactshouldsomethinggowrongduringthesystem’sdowntime.
According to Rob Dinsmore, availability computing expert, high availability computing can help
organizationsidentifytherisks beforehandandtake preventiveactionsinordertoavertthecrisis.
Factors Influencing Growth in the Pharmaceutical Industry
Anumberoffactorsareinfluencinggrowthinthepharmaceuticalindustry.Theyincludeanincreaseinthe
number of diseases, rising living standard of individuals in developed regions of the world, increasing
elderly population, introduction of newer and more effective products as a result of extensive research
and development practices, increasing consumer awareness, and changing consumer trends. All these
factors create a potential opportunity for the pharmaceutical companies to expand their operations in
ordertocatertotherisingdemandgloballyformedications.
Pharmaceutical Pollution
With the industry’s expansion, the impact on the environment is also intensifying. The nature of the
pharmaceutical industry is such that it can have a high impact on the environment, and the industry has
received significant criticism due to its perceived lack of environmental controls. The production of
pharmaceutical products results in high carbon dioxide emissions; and the temperature requirements for
productionresultsinthereleaseofozone-depletingsubstances,amajorconcernwithglobalwarming.
Regulatory controls require pharmaceutical companies to fulfill their corporate social responsibilities to
mitigate the environmental impact of their activities. In order to comply with these regulatory
requirements, companies need to be completely aware of all aspects of their processes and their overall
impactontheenvironment.High-availabilitycomputingcanhelpcompaniescollecttherelevantdata.
1
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Steps Taken by Companies to Address Environmental Impacts
PoliciesandObjectives
The first step for minimizing the environmental impact of pharmaceutical companies is developing the
policies and objectives for reduction of waste, for safety of employees and consumers, and for
conservation of the environment. These objectives and policies act as the underlying framework that
leadscompaniestowardsgreenerwaystoimplementtheirprocesses.
ResponsibilityforReducingEnvironmentalImpact
Another important step is to define the responsibilities of management for implementing and utilizing the
practices that lead toward the preservation of the environment. In order to implement policies and
objectives effectively, a pharmaceutical company must guarantee that policies are carried out efficiently
and within a reasonable time frame. These arrangements may include the assignment of additional
responsibilities to management, instructions to staff regarding implementation of policies and objectives,
trainingofstaffmembers,andsupervisionofstafftoensurethatthenecessarystepsaretakeninatimely
manner.
ActivePlanstoPreventPollution
Environmental pollution is one of the biggest concerns in the pharmaceutical industry. In order to reduce
environmental impact, it is important that companies operating in the industry develop active plans to
prevent pollution. Such plans may include adopting cleaner manufacturing practices, recycling materials,
using energy-efficient equipment, modifying manufacturing processes to reduce environmental impact,
andeliminatingwastesandhazardousemissions.
Role of High-Availability Computing in Reduction of Environmental Impacts
In order to determine the right path to reduce environmental impacts, an organization needs all the
available information to make effective decisions. High-availability computing can help a pharmaceutical
company collect in real time the relevant information, such as the extent of energy consumption at each
step in the manufacturing process, the extent of waste, availability of resources, and many other crucial
parameters.
With their increases in production, pharmaceutical companies are taking active steps to modify their
manufacturing processes to make them environmentally friendly. One of the most important steps is the
utilization of computers for the acquisition of all relevant information. This includes the real-time
monitoring of all manufacturing processes. Consequently, the monitoring systems must be highly
available so as not to lose any information. The proper management of the electronic records required to
support the auditing of environmental management is governed by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration’s Code of Federal Regulations Title 21 Part 11 (CFR21/11) entitled, “ Electronic Records;
ElectronicSignatures.”
In addition to automating process monitoring, multinational pharmaceutical companies are introducing
other innovative practices to reduce waste and to prevent pollution. These practices include the use of
Environmental Management Systems (EMSs). Such systems are standardized, and there is uniformity in
the application of these practices around the globe. Environmental management practices are governed
byinternationalstandards agencies such as theInternationalOrganizationfor Standardization (ISO). ISO
14000 is a family of standards to help organizations minimize how their operations (processes, etc.)
negatively affect the environment. This specification defines an EMS as “part of the overall management
system that includes organizational structure, planning activities, responsibilities, practices, procedures,
processes, and resources for developing, implementing, achieving, and maintaining the environmental
policy.”
2
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

For large-scale manufacturing facilities, it is also important to have a strong communication system. A
strong communication system helps different segments of the organization in sharing information in real
time.
Summary
By following the practices mentioned above, a pharmaceutical company can manage its environmental
impact. The company may need to make investments to reduce its environmental impact. In order to
assess the feasibility of the investment, management must consider all the relevant factors. They include
environmental performancedata pertaining to the company, industry-specific information, comparisons to
theindustry,andfeedbackfromstakeholders.
An added plus is that practices that adversely impact the environment are often wasteful. Reducing a
company’s environmental footprint may also lead to cost savings. Wasted raw materials and returned
goods do not add any value to a company. Effective management of the environmental aspects of a
company’soperationcanimproveitsbottomline.
High-availability computing can assist management in making decisions that are based on information
thatisup-to-dateandcomplete.
3
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com