Applying Predictive Analytics to Power Backup
December2015
According to a 2013 study by the Ponemon Institute,1 the leading cause of datacenter
outages is battery UPS failures following a power outage. UPS failures account for 24%
ofalldatacentercrashes.Another7%ofoutagesarecausedbygeneratorfailures,inwhichthegenerator
doesn’t start or fails during the power outage. These causes account for almost a third of all datacenter
outages.
Given the amount of detailed data that UPS and generator-monitoring facilities can provide, a field of
mathematics known as predictive analytics can be put to good use to detect pending failures and to
correctfaultsbeforetheycauseadatacenterincident.
What Is Predictive Analytics?
Predictive analytics is an area of data mining that exploits patterns found in historical data to predict risks
or opportunities. It provides a predictive probability that some event will happen. Often, the unknown
event of interest is in the future. Examples of the use of predictive analytics are credit-scoring (the
probability that a person will pay his bills) and credit-card fraud (the probability that a transaction is
fraudulent).
Predictive models associate the specific performance of a unit in a sample with multiple, measurable
attributesofthatunit.Theobjectiveofthemodelistoassessthelikelihoodthatasimilarunitinadifferent
samplewillexhibitthesameperformancegivenasimilarsetofattributes.
The available units with known attributes and known performance are the “training sample.” The units
with known attributes but unknown performance are the “out-of-training sample.” Based on the
relationships of attributes and performance in a training sample, predictive analytics attempts to assign a
probabilitytodifferentoutcomesofanout-of-sampleunitbasedonitsknownattributes.
Many analytical techniques are encompassed by predictive analytics. One of interest in computing
systems is survival analysis. Survival analysis estimates the time to failure of a component based on the
current value of certain attributes of that component. This is the form of predictive analytics that is of
interestinthisarticle.
Historically, using predictive analytics tools required advanced skills. However, as increasingly more
organizations added predictive analytics to their decision-making processes, vendors responded by
creating software tools that removed the mathematical complexity and that provided user-friendly
interfaces.
12013CostofDataCenterOutages,PonemonInstitute;December2013.
http://www.emersonnetworkpower.com/documentation/en-
us/brands/liebert/documents/white%20papers/2013_emerson_data_center_cost_downtime_sl-24680.pdf
1
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

According to the Rexer Analytics 2013 Data Miner Survey, the most popular commercial packages are
IBMSPSSModeler,SASEnterpriseMiner,andDellStatistica.
Applying Predictive Analytics to Battery UPS Systems
WhatIsaUPSSystem
Power reliability is addressed in modern-day data centers with backup generators. However, it takes
severalseconds for agenerator tostartupandcomeonline.Duringthis time,apower loss occurs unless
there is another source of power that can come online instantlyfor a time long enough for the generators
tobeginsupplyingpower.
This other source of power is
an Uninterruptible Power
Supply (UPS) system. As
shown in Figure 1, a UPS
containsarechargeableenergy
source that is thrown into
service when the primary utility
power is lost. It provides power
to the data center until the
backup generators come into
service. Should there be a
generator failure, the UPS
system provides power for a
long enough period of time to
support an orderly shutdown of
thesystemsinthedatacenter.
A typical UPS system is shown in Figure 1. Its first job is to clean utility power to the standards required
by the data center. “Clean power” is a constant voltage at a constant frequency (60 hertz in the United
States). As power is transmitted from the generating plants to the consumers, it can become “dirty.”
Voltages can fluctuate depending upon the power being consumed by other end users. High-frequency
noise can be induced into the power feed by appliances. This dirty power can cause problems in a data
center.
Tocleanthedirtyutilitypower,thepotentiallydirtyutilitypower isfedtoarectifier intheUPSsystem.The
rectifier converts the AC (alternating current) utility power to DC (direct current). This relatively clean
power is then converted back to AC byan inverter in the UPS system to provide clean power to the data
center.
In the event of a utility power failure, an automatic transfer switch detects the power loss and rapidly
connects the UPS rectifier to the emergency generator system. The UPS generates the controls to start
thegenerator,andpowerisrestoredtothedatacenter.
One problem with this approach is that there will be a several second outage to the data center, and it
likely will be disastrous. This is where the ‘uninterruptible’ in “UPS” comes in. Connected to the DC bus
from the rectifier to the inverter in the UPS is a device that stores energy in DC form.When the output of
the rectifier fails, the energy from the DC storage device feeds the inverter and keeps power flowing to
the data center until the emergency generators can come online. This is typically a time measured in
seconds.
In addition to this delay, the automatic transfer switch is often designed not to switch to the backup
generator for a few seconds so that brief utility power outages do not deplete the DC energy source for
starting the generators. Eighty percent of power outages last less than two seconds, and 98% last less
thantenseconds.
2
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

The predominant form of DC storage devices in use today are strings of batteries. However, batteries
haveseveralchallengesthatcanmakethebatterystringsunreliable.
DisadvantagesofBatterySystems
Batterystoragesystems havenotproventobereliable.ThePonemonstudyreferencedabovefoundthat
55% of respondents blamed battery failure as the root cause of a datacenter outage due to a primary
powerfailure.Humanerrorcameinsecond.
A typical data center operating on one megawatt of power will have about five strings of 40 batteries
each. This is a total of 200 batteries. The failure of any one battery will take its string out of service.With
one string out, there may not be enough backup energy to provide datacenter power for the time it takes
togetthegeneratorsonline.Thiswillcauseadatacenteroutage.Statisticsshowthat70%ofUPSservice
calls are the result of bad batteries. 40% of cases where power was lost to a critical load were the result
ofbatteryfailures.
As a battery ages, its internal resistance goes up. This prevents the battery from delivering its rated
power. In manycases, the pending failure of a battery cannot be detected until the battery is called upon
todeliverpower.
PredictingBatteryStringFailures
Battery-monitoring systems can produce a massive amount of data points. However, rarely do these
monitoring systems have the intelligence to manipulate the data to provide actionable insights. This is
wherepredictiveanalyticscomesin.Itcanofferclear,actionablealertsforintervention,maintenance,and
preemptiverepairs.
The first step, of course, is to install an effective monitoring system. Ensure that the contractor installing
themonitoringsystemtakesintoconsiderationservicingaccesstothebatteries.
It would be much simpler if every battery had one simple set of parameters. However, these parameters
varywith batterymanufacturer andbatterymodel. Parameterscaninclude,amongothers,stringvoltage,
unit voltage,batteryimpedance,ambienttemperature, unittemperature,ripple,andunitdischarge.These
alarms have different priorities, so which ones are important? If you are using predictive analytics to
predictfailures,allareimportant.
Increasing availability is what predictive analytics can do for a facility. For instance, it can help predict
when a battery in a string is nearing end-of-life so that the battery can be replaced before it causes a
stringfailureandapotentialUPSfailure.
Applying Predictive Analytics to Electrical Generators
Predictive analytics also can be applied to the generators. Data centers maybe considered the “brain” of
a company, but it is the generators that are keyto keeping that brain running and reliable in the face of a
power outage. A generator is arguably the most critical piece of equipment in a mission-critical facility.
Nevertheless,generatorfailuresplayamajorroleinunplanneddatacenteroutages.
In order to have visibility into potential failures, sophisticated monitoring systems collect data via sensors
in the data center’s power generating systems. Typically, the data gets reviewed; but most of it is not
used for immediate actions. Further analysis would enable facility managers to extract meaningful,
actionable insights. By examining this sensor data post-collection with predictive analytics, information
can be provided that will help data centers ensure uptime by predicting equipment failures before they
happen,especiallywithregardtogenerators.
3
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Currently, facility managers monitor their sensor information in real time to check the current status of
their generating systems. Are they getting too hot? Are they still running? However, the true value of this
mass of data points comes from storing the data and analyzing it from a historic viewpoint. Analyzing the
performance over time enables a facility manager to determine patterns that can be used to predict
outagesbeforetheyhappen.Thisistherolethatpredictiveanalyticsplays.
An Alternative for Battery UPS Systems
Sofarasbatterysystemsareconcerned,thereisnowavailableausefulalternative–flywheels.
A flywheel solves many of the problems associated with batteries. A flywheel can store energyjust like a
battery. The primarydifference is that a flywheel stores kinetic energy whereas a battery stores electrical
energy.
A flywheel is a disk that is spun up to a very
high speed, typically in a vacuum to reduce
drag. Once it reaches its operating speed, it
takes very little additional energy to maintain
thespeed.Currentflywheeltechnologyresults
in flywheel UPSs that are up to 98% efficient.
Thatis,ittakesonlyabout2%ofthedelivered
power of the UPS to maintain the speed of a
flywheel(inbatteryterminology,tokeepitfully
charged).
Theflywheel is connected to the DC bus via a
generator. Should the main power fail, the
generator driven by the flywheel continues to
deliver DC energytotheinverter andmaintain
the datacenter power until the backup
generators can come online. In battery
terminology, this is the discharge of energy
fromtheflywheel.
In principle, a DC motor-generator is employed. However, DC motor-generators require brushes and
commutators that are subject to wear and require maintenance. To address this challenge, an AC motor-
generator, which does not have these problems, is often utilized, as shown in Figure 2. To interface the
ACmotor-generatortotheDCbusoftheUPS,aninverterconvertstheUPSDCbusvoltagetoAC,which
drives the AC motor-generator working as a motor to charge the flywheel. If the primary power fails, the
energyintheflywheeldrivestheAC motor-generator asagenerator.ItsAC outputisconvertedtoDC via
arectifierandpowersthedatacenteruntilthegeneratorscanbebroughtonline.
Theamountof energystoredinaflywheelis proportionaltothemass of theflywheelandtothesquareof
its speed. Doubling the mass of the flywheel doubles its stored energy. Doubling the speed of the
flywheel quadruples its stored energy. Therefore, it makes engineering sense to trade mass for speed.
Early flywheel UPSs used steel disks and rotated at speeds in the order of 7,000 rpm. Newer flywheels
use relatively light-weight carbon filaments that have a great deal more tensile strength than steel. These
flywheelsarespunattensofthousandsofrpms.
Equally important, the light mass of fiber filament flywheels means that they can be suspended by
magnetic bearings, as opposed to the mechanical bearings of older flywheels. The older mechanical
bearingsrequiredperiodicmaintenanceandreplacement.Magneticbearingsaremaintenance-free.
Most flywheel systems come with a remote monitoring capability. As opposed to batteries, it is easy to
measurethechargestoredinaflywheelsystem.Itisbasicallyjustthespeedofrotation.
4
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

A single flywheel system can deliver several hundred kilowatts of power. In fact, some existing
commercial systems provide over a megawatt of power. Think about it – 200 batteries can be replaced
withoneflywheelsystem!
Thispowercanbedeliveredfortimesrangingfrom secondstominutesdependinguponhowmuchpower
mustbedeliveredbytheflywheelcomparedtoitscapacity.
Summary
Intoday’s datacenters,protectionfrom primarypower outages istypicallyprovidedbybackupgenerators
and UPS systems that supply power until the generator can be started and brought online. The failure of
ageneratororaUPSsystemisoneofthemajorcausesofdatacenteroutages.
Generators andUPSsystems typicallyaremonitored byextensivemonitoringsystems.However,mostof
the data generated by these monitoring systems is unused for any actionable purpose. By analyzing the
data in real time using predictive analytics, actionable insights can be generated for intervention and
maintenancebeforeafailureoccurs.Thiscanimprovetheavailabilityofadatacentersignificantly.
Acknowledgements
Informationforthisarticlewastakenfromthefollowingsources:
2013CostofDataCenterOutages,PonemonInstitute;December2013.
PredictiveAnalytics,Wikipedia.
RexerAnalytics2013DataMinerSurvey,RexerAnalytics;2013.
NewMethodsofMaximizingYourOldestDataCenterTechnology,DatacenterKnowledge.
StayOutoftheDark:ApplyingPredictiveAnalyticstoGenerators,ECMagazine;November20,2015.
FlywheelUPSSystems,AvailabilityDigest;January2014.
5
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com