– Our March Twitter Feed of Outages
March 2017
A challenge every issue for the Availability Digest is to determine which of the many
availability topics out there win coveted status as Digest articles. We always regret not
focusing our attention on the topics we bypass. With our new Twitter presence, we don’t
have to feel guilty. This article highlights some of the tweets that made headlines in
recent days.
AWS is investigating S3 issues, affecting Quora, Slack, Trello
Cloud infrastructure provider Amazon Web Services (AWS) on 28 February confirmed that it’s
looking into issues with its widely used S3 storage service in the major us-east-1 region of data
centers in Northern Virginia. Other services are affected as well.
https://t.co/IGBYTTdXfi
NBN Co admits to 'exorbitant' number of satellite failures
NBN Co has admitted to an "exorbitant" rate of failures for its Sky Muster satellite service,
forecasting that it may take as long as a year to iron out software bugs. Technical issues have
plagued the satellite service since the first Sky Muster satellite launched into space in October
2015. Many users have complained of poor service as well as a total inability to connect. The launch
of the second satellite late last year was marred by a botched software update to the Viasat modems
that help power the service.
https://t.co/fFk5I8cDf1
SpaceX will send 2 people on a trip around the moon next year
SpaceX is going to send two people on a trip around the moon in 2018. But don’t go getting fitted for
your spacesuit just yet — the two people have already been picked, and SpaceX says they paid “a
significant” (but undisclosed) amount for the privilege. The identities of the two space travelers was
left unannounced. SpaceX notes that training will begin later this year (and that they’ll say more
about who it is once the health tests are cleared). Elon noted that the passengers will be traveling in
a Dragon 2 capsule, powered by SpaceX’s still-in-design Falcon Heavy rocket.
https://t.co/rY0UXHEZXI
1
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Tens of thousands of Chromebooks fail because of Symantec BlueCoat problem
Well, this is annoying. Maryland's (state in U.S.) Montgomery County schools are using
Chromebooks. The school system is using about 120,000 Chromebooks and multiple PCs running
the Chrome web browser. But when Google recently updated them to Chrome OS 56, over 30
percent couldn't log on, while many PCs running Chrome were unable to reach the web. So, was it
Google's fault? Not so fast. The school system was using Symantec's BlueCoat, a man-in-the-middle
(MitM) SSL web proxy. This uses ProxySG technology to examine Secure-Socket Layer (SSL) and
Transport Layer Security (TLS) encrypted web content. So far, so good -- if you want to make sure
your seventh graders aren't peeking into pornography. But, in this case, it turns our BlueCoat doesn't
support the newest standard web security protocol, TLS 1.3.
https://t.co/ix3D43irrn
Google: 'Sorry for wide-scope outage but canary testing brought our cloud down'
A botched software update triggered January’s two-hour outage affecting Google Compute Engine
(GCE) instances, cloud VPNs, and network load balancers. While the incident wasn't as serious as a
past network outage, Google had promised a full explanation due to the "wide scope" of this one,
which dropped connections to all GCE instances, cloud VPN tunnels and network load balancers
that were created or live-migrated on Monday, January 30. The outage was triggered by a "large set"
of updates to its load-balancing gear, although the outage itself was caused by updates getting
jammed during testing inside a canary deployment.
https://t.co/15AhBmAPUe
Backup Explained
In five questions or less, an industry expert defines and explains a technology, term or trend – with
this installment seeing Richard Agnew, VP NW EMEA at Veeam, tackle backup.
https://t.co/rd370gUEvp
Google: We're sorry, but our cloud wiped out your Wifi and OnHub routers
Google has apologized for annoying Google Wifi and OnHub customers after accidentally triggering
a mass factory reset on the routers. A bunch of Wifi and OnHub owners panicked on 23 February
after discovering the devices were returned to a factory state, leaving owners offline despite the
absence of any disruption on carrier networks. Frustratingly for customers, the unrequested factory
reset required users to reconfigure device names and network settings, which Google admits isn't
that simple to do. The outage highlighted a problem with OnHub and Wifi's reliance on Google cloud
services for network connectivity.
https://t.co/XQUgBfbJlA
2
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Mastercard Fined Over RushCard Problems
Mastercard and UniRush, the company that sells RushCard-brand prepaid debit cards, have been
ordered to pay $13 million in fines and customer restitution over issues with the cards. The total
includes $3 million in fines and $10 million in customer restitution. The agency left it up to the
companies to decide how much each will pay. The fine stemmed from a 2015 system failure that left
thousands of customers unable to access the money in their accounts. The CFPB said that the
problems were caused by a lack of preparation and coordination by the companies before
Mastercard became UniRush’s main payment processor. Customers were unable to withdraw cash,
receive direct deposits, make purchases, or get accurate account balance information.
https://t.co/nbVmqfDTjz
HSBC Customers Left Frustrated After Internet Banking Outage
HSBC suffered an outage to its Business Internet Banking service in the UK on 27 February, with
hundreds of users taking to Twitter to vent their frustrations at being unable to access their accounts.
At 10:30 am, HSBC UK Business tweeted that it was “experiencing some issues with Business
Internet Banking, but we’re working to resolve this. Apologies for any inconvenience caused.”
As you would expect, the bank received a fierce backlash from angry Twitter users.
https://t.co/7zJ00qp8gK
Barclays apologies for cash machine and debit card outage - how to get compensation if
you lost out
On a Saturday afternoon in February, Barclays customers reported issues with withdrawing
money from cash machines and using debit cards in shops. Online and telephone banking and in-
branch payments were also affected. The bank said not all customers were impacted but that issues
had been reported across the UK. Angry customers flocked to Twitter to complain, with many saying
they were left red-faced after being unable to pay for shopping or restaurant meals.
https://t.co/Kf14ptTHTq
Westpac outage downs branches
An internal systems outage at Westpac took the bank's branch network offline around the country for
about seven hours on Monday, 27 February, and forced teller staff to resort to manual processes. It's
the second significant outage to hit the bank in three months following a glitch in late November that
stopped online and mobile banking platforms from processing payments or showing correct
balances for almost a week.
https://t.co/qk7lg1fe4C
Everything You Need to Know About Cloudbleed, the Latest Internet Security Disaster
Have you heard? A tiny bug in Cloudflare’s code has led an unknown quantity of data—including
passwords, personal information, messages, cookies, and more—to leak all over the Internet. If you
haven’t heard of the so-called Cloudbleed vulnerability, keep reading. This is a scary big deal.
https://t.co/0q09sAcx5C
3
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Internet Outage Causes American Airlines Ground Stop at Philadelphia Airport
A ground stop halted American Airlines flights bound for the airline’s Philadelphia International
Airport hub for nearly two hours in February. An American spokeswoman said the airport’s
Division of Aviation had a planned maintenance power outage from 1 to 4 a.m. When the power
came back on, American’s Internet access remained down. The outage, which impacted the
earliest departures Wednesday morning, prevented the airline and passengers from printing
boarding passes.
https://t.co/URQJDwefO6
Telstra enterprise outage caused by faulty hardware
Telstra has confirmed that its enterprise voice and data outage across New South Wales was
caused by a faulty piece of hardware .The outage affected only enterprise customers on Tuesday
morning, 21 February, until 1pm AEDT, with consumer fixed-line and mobile services not impacted
by the hours-long outage.
https://t.co/TGv4cs9nc6
The ransomware attack that locked hotel guests out of their rooms
Of the various things you may be worrying about these days, getting locked out of your lovely hotel
room in scenic Austria is probably not very high on the list. But in late January, guests at the
Romantik Seehotel Jaegerwirt in the Austrian village of Turracherhohe found themselves unable to
open their hotel room doors. In the end, the hotel ended up having to pay about $1,800 (two
bitcoins) to hackers who had penetrated its systems and managed to remotely lock its doors.
https://t.co/1wlQjAZTKC
HPE blames tax office outage on faulty SSD drive
Hewlett-Packard Enterprise has stated that outages at the Australian Taxation Office were caused
by a problem with solid state drives provided by a separate vendor. A spokesperson for
HPE stated that the disruption began when an SSD failed. While HPE did not name the vendor who
provided the drive in question, the spokesperson did say that a joint effort between HPE and the
vendor revealed that the outages were triggered by a ‘rare issue’, caused by a new, unique set of
circumstances.
https://t.co/JXkCNvO27W
Google Outage Traced to Network Glitch
Google has tentatively traced the cause of a roughly two-hour global cloud outage to an internal
software issue related to its virtual network traffic routing. The Google Compute Engine public cloud
outage commenced at 10:40 p.m. Pacific time on Wednesday (Feb. 18). Traffic loss was stopped
and normal traffic levels resumed at about 1:20 a.m. local time on Thursday (Feb. 19). In a status
report, Google said the "preliminary" root cause of the outage was traced to the Compute Engine's
virtual network for VM outgoing traffic. The company said the network stopped issuing routing
information.
https://t.co/r3KodexDLg
4
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Self-Driving Cars Have a Problem: Their Human Monitors Keep Dozing Off!
As Ford has been developing self-driving cars, it has noticed a problem during test drives: Engineers
monitoring the robot rides are dozing off. Company researchers have tried to roust the engineers
with bells, buzzers, warning lights, vibrating seats and shaking steering wheels. They've even put a
second engineer in the vehicle to keep tabs on his human counterpart. No matter -- the smooth ride
was just too lulling and engineers struggled to maintain "situational awareness," said Raj Nair,
product development chief for the Dearborn, Michigan-based automaker.
https://t.co/SVG8Z35dlO
Lessons Learned from Gitlab’s Massive Backup Failure
GitLab.com, a multi-million-dollar startup, lost over 300GB of data after a failed backup process. This
is just one of the cases that show us that backups don’t matter if you can’t restore and that IT
administrators need to make a solid habit out of testing their backups and recovery capacity.
https://t.co/wxzZghkrvg
IT glitch at NASA led to fire
A security patch that shut down monitoring equipment in a large NASA engineering oven resulted in
a fire that destroyed spacecraft hardware inside it. Since the computer reboot to accommodate the
software upgrade also crippled fire alarm activation, the fire in the oven wasn't discovered for three
and a half hours. This is just one example of how a lack of coordination between IT and industrial
control systems can wreak havoc.
https://t.co/5EXsx7bMC9
Particles from outer space are wreaking low-grade havoc on personal electronics
When your computer crashes, and you get the dreaded blue screen; or your smartphone freezes,
and you have to go through the time-consuming process of a reset, most likely you blame the
manufacturer: Microsoft or Apple or Samsung. In many instances, however, these operational
failures may be caused by the impact of electrically charged particles generated by cosmic rays that
originate outside the solar system.
https://t.co/RQHR8GqGyb
Stopping financial crashes with physics
In August 2012, an incomplete software update at Knight Capital caused around 4 million rogue
stock-market orders to be executed. Over the next 45 minutes, some $457 million was lost as a
result. Whilst this event was caused by a combination of a software glitch and human error, it’s
very possible that a cyber-attack could have the same effect. Finsec - the cyber-security of
financial systems – is a thematic focus for the Institute for Security Science and Technology. We
caught up with Vincent Sebag to hear about his recent MSc. project at the ISST, applying
econophysics to finsec.
https://t.co/xIyRRUXJlg
5
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Suncorp system upgrade causes cash to disappear
A problem with an upgrade to Suncorp Bank's systems in February caused money to disappear from
customer accounts and sent others into overdraft. The unspecified glitch occurred during an upgrade
to Suncorp's core banking platform.
https://t.co/K9FUHhy78b
Why Wind Turbines Should Talk to Each Other
A wind turbine spinning its blades in a valley in southeast India asks a turbine on a plain in
Iowa if it should slow down or speed up its rotation. Sound like the stuff of science fiction? It’s
not. GE has been developing software, sensors and networking technology that enable wind
turbines to talk to each other not only within the confines of a particular wind farm but even
across the planet.
https://t.co/tfMFnUBzys
Four Challenges to Building A Reliable Cloud Telephony System In India
Cloud telephony is emerging as one of the fastest-growing technologies of the decade. Its low setup
cost and easy scalability makes it an easy choice for every business that must deal with customers –
every business. Both the Internet and legacy telephone systems come with unique problems of their
own, right from dependency on weather conditions to challenges with policy regulations.
https://t.co/3h3rzRNWBh
The science of uptime: How big websites manage huge traffic loads 24×7
Websites like YouTube, Facebook and other popular names need to be running 24 x 7 and must
keep up with demand for their billions of users worldwide. The time websites spend up and running
