Protectionagainstmalwarebeginsatthenetwork layer.Theintentatthislevelistopreventanymalicious
software from entering the system in the first place. Firewalls look for file names or signatures of known
threats and block them. IPS (intrusion prevention systems) monitor traffic flows on the network and can
stopanattack byterminatingthe network connection or user session originating the attack or byblocking
access to the target from the user account or IP address. An IPS can reconfigure other security controls
suchasafirewalltoblockanattack.
Sandboxing
Another technique used at the network protection layer is “sandboxing.” New executables received by a
system or an endpoint are installed in an isolated virtual environment and monitored for a period of time.
If they exhibit suspicious behavior, they are deleted. Since suspicious exectuables are never installed as
operational software, they can do no damage. If they appear to be benign, they are allowed into the
system.
DeviceProtection
At the device (system or endpoint) level, most devices run antivirus software. There are two types of
antivirussoftware–blacklistingandwhitelisting
BlackListing
Perhaps the most common prevention technique is black listing. Black listing is the technique used by
antivirus programs that run on systems and endpoints. Known threats are identified by file names,
signatures,orsomeothermeans.Theantivirussoftwareblocksanyknownvirusfromenteringthesystem
orendpoint.Thenumberofnewvirusesincreasesdramaticallyonadailybasis,andtheantivirusvendors
identifytheseasquicklyastheycanandsendupdatestotheprotectedsystemsandendpoints.
4
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

WhiteListing
White listing is the opposite of black listing. With this technique, signatures for all applications that are
allowed to run on a system or on an endpoint device are maintained by the antivirus facility. An
applicationcanrun onlyif its signatureis on the approved list. If theexecution of amalware process or of
aninfectedprocessisattempted,itssignaturewillnotbeonthelistanditwillnotbeallowedtorun.
Whitelistingprovidesahigherdegreeofprotectionthandoesblack listing,butitimposesaheavyloadon
the security administration staff. New applications are continually added to the system. Existing
applications are frequently updated. Applications may even modify themselves. As a consequence,
legitimateapplicationsaresometimesblockedfromexecution.
Evasion
Sophisticated malware is continually evolving and finding ways to evade these protections. Firewalls and
antivirus facilities are bypassed by changing file names or signatures of malicious software. To defeat
sandboxing, some malware will remain inactive for a period of time (minutes to days) until it is moved to
anactiveenvironment,oritwillwaituntilitdetectssomeuseractivitysuchasmouseclicksthatindicateit
is in an active environment. White listing is evaded by using stolen vendor certificates to make the
malwareappearlegitimate.
Another technique that is sometimes used by cybercriminals is to launch a DDoS attack on a site
followingasuccessfulattack suchasalargemoneytransfer.Thisisintendedto diverttheattentionofthe
organization’ssecuritystaffsoastodelaythedetectionoftheattack.
Infection
Once a malware infection has evaded all of the security controls, it can
install itself in memory. At this point, it is generally active and undetectable.
There is no need for further evasion techniques. Until it is detected and
blocked in an endpoint device, it can attack the VPN to get employee
credentials by key logging or by grabbing screen shots of forms being filled
out. Indeed, as experience has shown, the detection of an infection is often
onlybyathirdpartyandoccursdays,weeks,ormonthslater.
We will later discuss steps that can be taken to facilitate the detection and
blockingofmaliciousinfectionsthathavetakenholdofanendpointdevice.
AnatomyofanAttack
Thus,therearefourphasestoasuccessfulattack:
 Lure the user to download malicious software by getting him to go to a malicious web site and
download something from that site or to open an email attachment that contains some malicious
code.
 Evadeallofthesecuritycontrols.
 Exploitavulnerabilityinanapplicationorinthesystemorendpointdevice.
 Attacktheapplicationorstealdata.
It is sobering to note that 77% of the malicious code that is found in systems today is software that you
canbuyofftheshelf.
5
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Zero-Day Attacks
What is needed is better attack protection that can detect and delete advanced malware that has
bypassedsecuritycontrols beforeitenables a breach. This is especiallyimportant for zero-dayattacks.A
zero-day attack is an attack by malware that has not been seen before. Therefore, there is no antivirus
protection for detecting and blocking it. It has no reputation attached to it upon which the antivirus can
operate. It the malware gets bythe firewall and other network protection facilities, it will infect the system
orendpoint.
Thereareatleasttwofacilitiesthatcanbeemployedtocombatexistinginfections.
SIEM(SecurityInformationandEventManagement)
SIEM systems gather security-related events from a multitude of systems in the enterprise and organize
them into a common database. There, sophisticated mining tools can be used to find suspicious patterns
ofoperation.
If a system or endpoint has been infected, the infection may not be detectable but its activities will be. A
SIEM can identify suspicious activity and quickly notify the organization’s security staff so that it can
investigate and take appropriate containment actions. Though this detection is after the fact, it will be
much faster (minutes or hours) than the third-party reporting common today, which can take weeks or
more.Thus,thedamagecausedbytheinfectioncanbesignificantlyminimized.
An example of a SIEM tool is HP’s ArcSight. ArcSight combines event data from all systems within an
enterprise data center and analyzes it for data breaches. Malicious activity will often compromise several
systemsinordertoachieveitsgoals,sobeingabletolookacrosstheenterpriseisimportant.
HP’s powerful fault-tolerant NonStop servers are interfaced to ArcSight via HP’s XYGATE Merged Audit
product from XYPRO Technology Corporation (www.xypro.com). Andrew Price, XYPRO’s Director of
Product Management, notes that “SIEMs are becoming an increasingly important weapon in the CSO’s
arsenal, because of the massive amount of audit data being generated across multiple disparate
computer systems in a typical enterprise. This data needs to be normalised and correlated to be useful,
and needs to be analysed as near to real-time as possible to ensure that anybreach is quicklydetected.
In numerous breach scenarios, organisations have had audit data showing the breach occurred, but had
not analysed the data and realised that there was an issue, resulting in days, and sometimes weeks, for
hackers to continue their work undetected. XYGATE Merged Audit allows all audit and security event
datafrom theHPNonStop tobe included with the rest of theenterprise’s auditdata,ensuringacomplete
viewoftheentireorganisation.”
TrusteerRapport
Rapport from Trusteer (www.trusteer.com) is a unique facilitythat it can rapidlydetect malware directlyin
an endpoint device’s memory. Thus, malware that has successfully evaded all of the other security
controls in a system can be disabled by Rapport before it can take any actions. This ultimate layer
protectsanendpointdevicewherever itis,evenifitis beingusedatauser’shomeorinhistravels where
heisnotprotectedbythecorporation’snetworklayer.
Rapport works byinstalling a small snippet onto the endpoint at login time. The snippet does not have to
scan the machine or download any list of threats. It simply finds threats and disables any it finds. It
accomplishes this via several mechanisms. It looks for suspicious actions, such as an application that is
tryingtoinstallsomethingorspinoffchildprocesses.Ifitfindssuchapplications,itfreezesthem.
Trusteer notes that 77% of malware algorithms are known. It can therefore recognize these actions and
block them. Rapport provides protection against well-known attacks such as key loggers, screen
6
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

catchers, process tampering, browser functions, and DNS poisoning. For instance, it will encrypt all
keystrokessothattheyaremeaninglesstomalware.ItensuresthatAPIcallstocapturescreensarefrom
avalidsource.Itpreventsprocessmodification.
It will validate sites to which the user is trying to connect and will reroute the user from amalicious site to
thesiteheisactuallytryingtoaccess.Itwillpreventusersfromusingcredentialsonphishingsites.
Trusteer finds that 1% to 5% of the endpoint devices on which in installs Rapport have already been
infectedwithundetectedmalware,whichRapportwillthenremove.
Actions that Rapport takes are reported to a central Trusteer repository for analysis by Trusteer
specialists,andcustomersarenotifiedoftheirfindings.
Rapport is not a replacement for firewalls or antivirus software. Rather, it is the ultimate line of defense
againstmalwarethathasmanagedtoevadethesesecuritycontrols.
Summary
Cybercriminals are now directly targeting a company’s employees rather than going after corporate
systems. This is because law enforcement has become more successful at prosecuting cybercriminals
who succeed in large attacks, and individual employee attacks garner less law-enforcement notice. Even
so, the stealing of employee credentials can result in successful major attacks. This trend is aggravated
by the off-the-shelf availability of powerful malware that can be used by cybercriminals to wage
successfulattackswithlittleeffort.
TheFBIinitsreportreferencedearliermadeseveralrecommendationstoimprovesecurity.Thoughthere
wereseveral,theycanbeseparatedintofourcategories:
 Educateusersaboutsuspiciousemailsandmaliciouswebsites.
 IsolatecriticalsystemsfromtheInternetsothatthereisnopathforinfections.
 Process improvements to add additional levels of review, approval, and auditing of critical
activitiessuchaswiretransfers.
 Tools should be strengthened to detect infections and endpoint exploitations. The use of SIEMs
and infection-detection tools such as Rapport are examples of tools that corporations should
considerdeploying.
No matter how smart we are at defending ourselves against malicious attacks, it seems that
cybercriminals are always smarter. Whatever defenses we throw up are quickly thwarted by rapidly
evolvingmalware.However,thoughendless,thefightmustgoon.
7
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com
