Handelsbanken Turns to Parallel Sysplex
October2009
Founded in 1871, Svenska Handelsbanken (www.handelsbanken.com) survived two world wars
and multiple recessions to become one of the largest banks in the Nordic countries.
Headquartered in Stockholm, Sweden, it has more than 460 branches in Sweden and 240
branches in the rest of Scandinavia and throughout the world, including the U.S., England,
Singapore,China,andRussia.
The bank offers a full range of services to corporate, institutional, and private customers. It is a
global universal bank that covers the traditional areas of corporate financing, investment banking
andtrading as well as consumer banking.Itprovides corporate andindividual clients withdeposit
products, loans, credit cards, and other banking services. Subsidiaries operate in several related
areas,includinglifeinsurance,mortgages,pensions,fundmanagement,andInternetbanking.
An innovative feature of Handelsbanken’s Internet services is its unique branch office web sites
anddirecte-mailaddressestoeachbranchforenhancedcustomerservice.
Facing the Need for Continuous Availability
Handelsbanken realized that the growing dependence by its customers on online banking and
credit cards required these critical services to be continuously available. Should online banking
services go down, customers could not query their account balances, execute bill payments,
transfer funds between accounts, or accomplish the many other banking tasks that they were
accustomedtodoingfromtheirPCs.
Furthermore, if the bank’s card services failed, customers using cards issued by Handelsbanken
wouldnotbeabletomakein-storeoronlinepurchasesnorgetcashfromATMmachines.
Continuousavailabilitymeansthatcustomerservicescanneverbetakendown,eitherbecauseof
a system failure or for system upgrades and bug fixes. Because the bank was growing, the
systemalsohadtobescalablebasedonbusinessdemand.
Handelsbanken decided to implement these mission-critical functions using an IBM Parallel
Sysplex system. Parallel Sysplex is an active/active architecture1 that allows multiple
geographically-separatednodestocooperateinacommonapplication.Shouldanodefail,allthat
needs to be done is to route all transactions to the surviving node. Consequently, faults in the
systemcanbetransparenttothebank’scustomers.
1WhatisActive/Active?,AvailabilityDigest;October,2006.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0101/what_is_active-active.pdf
1
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

The Parallel Sysplex Architecture
IBM’s Parallel Sysplex systems2 are multiprocessor clusters that can support from two to thirty-
two mainframe nodes (typically S/390 or zSeries systems). A Parallel Sysplex system is nearly
linearlyscalableuptoits32-processorlimit.
Anodemaybeaseparatesystemoralogicalpartition(LPAR)withinasystem.Thenodesdonot
have to be identical. They can be a mix of any servers that support the Parallel Sysplex
environment.zSeriesandS/390mainframesystemsaresupportedasParallelSysplexnodes.
CouplingFacility
sharedlocks,lists,queues,data
STP
zSeriessystem zSeriessystem
timesync
CouplingFacility
(optional)
sharedlocks,lists,queues,data
shareddisksubsystem
IBMParallelSysplexSystem
The nodes in a Parallel Sysplex system interact as an active/active architecture. The system
allows direct, concurrent read/write access to shared data from all processing nodes without
sacrificing data integrity. Therefore, transaction load can be distributed between the nodes in the
system.
The Coupling Facility (CF) is the key to shared processing. The CF enables high-performance
read/write sharing of data by applications running on each node of the cluster through global
lockingandcachecoherencymanagementmechanisms.Italsoprovidescluster-widequeuingfor
workloaddistributionandformessagepassingbetweennodes.
2ParallelSysplex–FaultTolerancefromIBM,AvailabilityDigest;April2008.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0304/ibm_sysplex.pdf
2
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

The nodes are time-synchronized via the Server Time Protocol (STP), which is implemented as
microcodewithinthenodes’processors.
To provide disaster tolerance, the nodes may be separated by arbitrary distances. IBM’s GDPS
(Geographically Dispersed Parallel Sysplex) data-replication engine is used to maintain
geographically separated database copies in synchronization. GDPS Metro Mirror provides
synchronous replication over distances up to 200 km. GDPS Global Mirror provides
asynchronousreplicationoverunlimiteddistances.
IBM System z10 Chosen by Handelsbanken for Parallel Sysplex Nodes
Handelsbanken choose the IBM System z10 mainframes running the z/OS operating system as
the nodes for its Parallel Sysplex system. The z10 EC (Enterprise Class) is a massively scalable
symmetric processing system (SMP) that can contain up to 64 processing units (PUs) and 1,136
gigabytes of memory. The PUs use quad-core chips operating at 4.4 gigahertz. The z10 BC
(BusinessClass)isasomewhatslowerandsmallerversionoftheSystemz10EC.
The PUs contained in a z10 system come in several
configurations. Those configured as Central Processors (CPs) are
the general-purpose central processors in the system. In addition,
several processors may be configured as one of the specialty
processors. The specialty processors use the same hardware as
the CPs but have microcode limited to their specific function.
Specialtyprocessorsinclude:
 zIIP (Integrated Information Processor), which relieves the
central processors (CPs) of specific DB2 database
processingloads.
 zAAP (Application Assist Processor), which is dedicated to
running specific Java and XML workloads to accelerate
performance.
IBMSystemz10EC
 ICF (Internal Coupling Facility processor), which implements the Coupling Facility
functioninsoftwareinsteadofhavingtousetheCFhardwareoption.
Multiplespecialtyprocessorsofeachtypemaybeconfiguredwithinasinglez10system.
Inaddition,the z10 offers afeature importantto Handelsbanken,and this is capacityon demand.
By configuring the z10 system with spare processors, called CBUs (Capacity Backup Upgrade),
the customer can invoke those PUs at anytime to handle additional loads.Whenneeded, anyor
all of the CBUs can immediatelybe put into service for whatever time is necessary to temporarily
addcapacitywithoutanycommunicationwithIBM.
The Handelsbanken Parallel Sysplex System
Handelsbankenutilizes two Stockholm-baseddata centers that arefivekilometersaparttohouse
the two nodes of its Parallel Sysplex system. The two nodes are each IBM System z10 EC
mainframesconfiguredalmostthesame.Onenodehasthefollowingconfiguration:
 7generalpurposeprocessors(CPs).
 1zAAPprocessorforJavaprocessing.
 1zIIPprocessorforDistributedDB2load
 1ICFprocessorforshareddata.
3
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

 6CBUprocessorsforadditionalcapacityduringsingle-nodeoperation.
 45gigabytesofmemory.
TheothernodeisconfiguredsimilarlyexceptthatithassixCPsratherthanseven.
Each site has a DS8100 disk storage arrayproviding 45 terabytes of disk storage (expandable to
384 terabytes). The DS8100s at each site are connected to each node via a fibre-channel SAN
(storage area network). One DS8100 is designated the primary data storage and the other the
backup data storage The application data stored on the primary DS8100 is replicated to the
backupviaIBM’sMetroMirrorsynchronous-replicationengine.
DataCenterA DataCenterB
IBM IBM
5kilometers
01zmetsyS 01zmetsyS
z10 z10
primarySAN
backupSAN
MetroMirror
datareplication
DS8100 DS8100
(primary) (backup)
Handelsbanken’sParallelSysplexSystem
Since both nodes are using the same database across the primarySAN, transaction load can be
balanced across the nodes. Any transaction can be sent to either node for processing. Load
balancing is accomplished by the z10”s WLM (Workload Management) facility and the Sysplex
Distributer.
ShouldtheprimaryDS8100fail,theGDPSHyperSwapfacilitywillswitchalldiskaccessfrom the
primarystorageunittothebackupstorageunitbyactivatingthebackupSAN.Switchover is done
insecondsandistransparenttotheusers.
Should a node fail, all transaction traffic is routed to the surviving node, and its six spare CBU
processors are activated to handle the increased load. Should an entire site fail, all traffic is
rerouted to the surviving site, which will use its local DS8100 for the application database. In all
cases,failoverismeasuredinseconds.
A common problem with active/backup configurations is that failover testing is complex,
expensive, and risky. Therefore, failover testing is often not done or only partially done, leaving
the company with nothing but hope that a failover will succeed in the event of a failure. Not so
with an active/active system. It is known that both nodes are operational because they are
activelyprocessingtransactions.
4
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Handelsbanken takes advantage of this capability by testing failover to a single site twice per
year.Therefore,theyarecertainthatfailoverwillworkifneeded.
Summary
Handelsbanken’s requirement for continuous availability of its mission-critical services in the
event of a system failure is satisfied with its Parallel Sysplex system. Even if a data center is
destroyed by some disaster, all transactions will be immediately shifted to the surviving data
centersothatcustomerserviceswillsuffernointerruption.
Equallyimportant,planneddowntimeiseliminatedsincethetransactionloadcanberoutedtotally
toonenode,allowingtheothernodetobebeingupgraded.
Furthermore, Handelsbanken’s scalability requirement is met because of the massive scalability
of the z10 EC systems. Handelsbanken’s initial configuration is only about 10% of the z10”s
capability. Should a capacity upgrade be necessary, one or more CBUs can be put into
permanent service. Other upgrades can be rolled through the system one node at a time while
theothernodecarriesthefullload.
As a result, the use of Parallel Sysplex has allowed Handelsbanken to meet its availability and
scalabilitygoals.
5
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com