Serverless Computing
January 2018
A new technology is about to become one of IT’s most valuable tools. It is serverless
computing, which allows one to build and run applications and services without thinking
about servers. With serverless computing, you don’t need to provision, scale, and
manage any servers. Everything required to run and scale a high-availability application is handled by a
cloud service provider.
What Is Serverless Computing?
Serverless computing is a new way of hosting applications on infrastructure that end users do not
manage. Serverless architectures let developers and users execute tasks without worrying about servers,
virtual machines, or the underlying compute resources.
Serverless computing is a cloud-computing execution model in which the cloud provider dynamically
allocates compute and storage resources on the fly. Code execution is fully managed by the cloud
provider. By adding another layer of abstraction atop the cloud infrastructure, serverless computing allows
developers and users to not have to worry about managing and maintaining the servers that are
executing their applications. For these people, worrying about infrastructure is a chore they can readily do
without. Serverless computing relieves them of that burden.
Of course, servers are still needed to run the applications. The name ‘serverless’ simply highlights the fact
that end users do not have to manage the servers that run their code.
With serverless computing, the cloud infrastructure allocates just those compute resources needed to run
the user’s code. It uses only the precise amount of compute resources needed to complete the task – no
more, no less. Pricing is based on the actual amount of resources consumed by an application, rather
than on pre-purchased units of capacity. Thus, if the application is not running, there is no cost.
AWS Lambda, from Amazon (described later), was the first product released to the marketplace to
provide serverless computing.
Functions
A serverless computing architecture executes functions. A function is a single-purpose block of code. A
service is assembled from a set of functions.
Developers can access functions from a library to build their services. There is no need for them to
consider server infrastructure as they create an application.
1
© 2018 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Events
Every time an event is received, the serverless platform executes the functions associated with that
event. Thus, users can execute code without worrying about the underlying infrastructure or the
management of servers.
Customers pay a fraction of a penny every time a function is executed.
Services
Services are triggered by events. The resources required to execute a service are created at the time of
the event. Therefore, this results in a very resource-efficient way to build applications.
Being event-driven means that a company is only charged for compute processing when the code is
running. Thus, serverless computing is very cost-efficient.
It should be noted that legacy applications cannot run within a serverless environment. They must be
rewritten.
Benefits
There are many benefits to serverless computing:
• There is no server management since there is no need to provision or maintain any servers. The
cloud allocates all necessary resources on a need basis.
• Scaling is flexible. Resources are added as necessary by the cloud and are retired when no
longer needed.
• High availability is achieved. There is no need to architect for this capability since the cloud
provides high-availability services.
• There is no idle capacity sitting around waiting to be used. There is no need to provision for
processing capacity or storage.
• Organizations can abandon infrastructure administration. There is no need to provision,
configure, and manage infrastructure.
• Libraries of functions and services reduce the amount of code developers need to write from
scratch.
• Developers can run test and production environments in minutes.
• Security is enhanced. Automatic scaling helps mitigate the risk of DDoS attacks and cripples
attackers from targeting operating system vulnerabilities.
• There is no charge to the customer when the customer’s code is not running.
Serverless computing allows one to define individual API end points that perform actions once they are
triggered by the application code. The underlying system will handle provisioning of appropriate
infrastructure in order to manage the load.
Building serverless applications means that developers can focus on their core product instead of
worrying about managing and operating servers or runtimes, either in the cloud or on-premises.
2
© 2018 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Concerns
The major concern is that serverless computing is an immature market. Monitoring, logging, development,
and debugging tools are non-existent or only marginally developed. Security functions are still emerging.
Each vendor has its own set of products, so vendor lock-in is a problem. Once implemented, it is difficult
to port to another platform.
Since functions must be accessed from a library when needed, performance can suffer from function
latency if it has been a while since a function’s last invocation.
Amazon Lambda
Amazon was the first to bring to market a serverless computing environment. Named ‘AWS Lambda,’ it
provides Functions as a Service (FaaS).
AWS Lambda was introduced in 2014 and was inspired by Amazon’s Simple Storage Service (S3).
Whereas S3 stores objects, and you don’t know where, AWS Lambda manages functions, and you have
no control over those functions. When an event happens, AWS Lambda executes the functions
associated with that event.
The customer does not need to pay for dedicated servers or capacity in advance. The customer only
pays for the compute time used.
Summary
Serverless computing is a new paradigm in the IT arsenal. With serverless computing, applications can
be executed without any effort being put forth to provision or manage servers. The serverless computing
environment handles all of that for you. This gives developers the ability to focus on what they are
supposed to be doing – managing applications or creating new applications.
Acknowledgements
Information for this article was taken from the following sources:
What is serverless computing? Here’s how AWS Lambda is helping enterprises run it, Computer World;
July 10, 2017.
What serverless computing really means, InfoWorld; July 11, 2016.
Serverless explainer: The next generation of cloud infrastructure, Network World; April 3, 2017.
The big opportunities in serverless computing, Venture Beat; October 22, 2017.
Everything you need to know about serverless computing, Computer Business Review; December 21,
2017.
How Serverless Computing will Change the World in 2018, Hacker Noon; December 31, 2017.
Wikipedia
3
© 2018 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman
