Shore Micros’ 100-Microsecond Link Failover
March2011
How do you fail over to a redundant component in 100 microseconds? With hardware, not
software or firmware. But isn’t this an expensive approach? Not with field-programmable gate
arrays. This is the secret behind Shore Microsystems’ Network Protection System (NPS) Link
Protectors.
Ethernet Link Failures
Therearemanycurrenttechnologiestodaythatcontributetomeetingavailabilityrequirements,all
depending upon redundancy – redundant servers, redundant storage subsystems, redundant
powersources,redundantnetworks.
Redundant networks pose a special problem. If redundant servers, storage units, or power are
down, no data is being generated. However, if redundant networks are down, valid data is not
beingdistributedandmaybelost.
A redundant network maybe down for two reasons – all network links are down, or an active link
hasfailed;andthenetworkisintheprocessoffailing over toabackuplink.Consideringthelatter
case, link failover times are typically very fast, much faster than server or storage failover times.
Link failover istypicallymeasuredinmilliseconds,notsecondsorminutesas istypical withhighly
available redundant server/storage architectures. When a ten-megabit link was once considered
fast, these failover times were more than adequate. Unfortunately, in today’s world of gigabit and
fasterlinks,millisecondfailovertimesarenotfastenough;andtheyarebecomingtroublesome.
Consider a one-gigabit link. A single bit is sent every nanosecond. During a forty-millisecond link
failover,fortymillionbits,or fivemillionbytes, willbe lost.At1,000bytes per packet,this is aloss
of 5,000packets,or probablyhundreds if notthousands ofmessages.ThoughTCP/IPmessages
may be recoverable, UDP messages are certainly lost. And the problem is ten times worse with
thenewerten-gigabitlinktechnologies.
Shore Microsystems’ Link Protectors greatly reduce this problem by providing link failover times
of100microsecondsratherthanmilliseconds.
LinkProtectionDevices
Many network devices support dual connections to a backbone Ethernet network, such as dual
NIC cards on the attached device, load balancers, switches, and hubs. Routers can detect failed
links and reroute to an alternate link according to their routing tables. These devices monitor
trafficonaprimarylinkandswitchovertoabackuplinkiftheprimarylinkfails.
1
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Therearetwowaystodeterminethatalinkhasfailed:
 Thereisnolinksignal(essentiallyacarrier)beingreceivedfromthenetwork.
 There is no packet traffic even though a link signal is being received (the fault may be
furtherdownthenetwork).
Linkprotectorsareredundanttransceiversthatprovideafull-duplexlinkconnectionforanetwork-
attached device such as a server, a storage subsystem (SAN or NAS), or a client terminal. They
route traffic over either of two links that provide connection to the backbone network. One link is
the primary link that is used during normal operation. The other link is a backup link that carries
theprotecteddevice’strafficshouldtheprimarylinkfail.
primary
link
switches
server
hubs
storage linkprotector
client protected routers
device secondary LANS
link link
network
Shore Microsystems’ Link Protector
Among its other products, Shore Microsystems’ Ethernet Link Protectors have extremely fast
failover times – 100 microseconds - that provide redundant links for mission-critical Ethernet
connections. Link Protectors are a key component for designers that must respond to high-
availability requirements. The company’s Link Protectors support 1000BaseT, 1000BaseF,
100BaseTX,100BaseFX,and10BaseTEthernetconnections.
In addition, Link Protectors can
broadcast simultaneous streams
of data from the protected device
over both primary and backup
links.
Using the company’s Straight
Through Wire® technology, the
Link Protectors will continue to
pass traffic even in the event of a
totalpowerloss.
TurboSwitching
Shore Microsystems achieves such fast failover times in its Link Protectors by moving from
firmware-controlled devices to Field-Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGA) to implement the Link
Protector logic. An FPGA is an integrated circuit that can be configured and reconfigured in the
field. Its configuration is generally specified via a high-level hardware description language.
Rather than storing firmware instructions that must be executed by an operating system, FPGAs
route signals through reconfigurable hardware. Thus, logic execution times are measured in
nanosecondsratherthaninmicroseconds.Failovertimeismeasuredinmicrosecondsratherthan
inmilliseconds.
ALink Protectormonitorsthelink signalonitsprimaryandbackuplinksandwillalarm ifitsenses
a loss of signal on any link. It checks signal quality every five microseconds. If it determines that
the primaryport has lost its link signal,the Link Protector switches traffic tothebackuplink.Total
timetodetectasignalloss,todecidetofailover,andtoswitchoverisaccomplishedinunder100
microseconds.
2
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

The Link Protector will also failover if it detects no packet traffic. A downstream network failure
willnotcausealinksignalloss,butwillprohibitanypacketsfrombeingpassed.
When the primary link is restored, the Link Protector will reconnect to the primary link.
Alternatively, using Link Protector’s Latchmode feature, the connection can be locked to the
backup port following a failover. This eliminates the possibility of the connection switching back
andforthiftheprimarylinkiserratic.
PowerSafe
Most commercially available redundant transceivers regenerate signals electronically. Thus,
these network components are a single point of failure in the event of a power interruption. Using
the company’s Straight Through Wire technology, Shore Microsystems’ Link Protectors continue
to pass traffic even in the event of a total power failure, provided that the primary link is still
operational. Networks will typically continue to operate in the event of a power failure since the
networkdevicesincludebatterybackups.
For copper links, the Link Protectors use high-frequency relays for power protection. Should the
Link-Protector power fail,thedeenergizedrelaydirectlyconnects theprotectedlink totheprimary
link.
Forfiberlinks,anopticalswitchsupportsthesamefunction.
LinkProtectorPackagingOptions
Each Link Protector is a separate card. The card provides three ports – one for
the protected link and two for the primary and backup links. Multiple cards are
housed in a chassis. There are two chassis options – the NPS 2 and the NPS
12.AchassiscomprisesaNetworkProtectionSystem(NPS).
NPS2
The NPS 2 provides space for two removable Link Protector cards in a 1U rack-mountable
configuration. The chassis includes dual fixed power supplies. Link connections can be a mix of
copper and fiber. The chassis contains onboard management of the Link Protectors with a port
fortheNetworkManagementConsole.
NPS12
The NPS 12 provides space for twelve removable Link Protector cards in a 2U rack-mountable
configuration. The chassis includes hot-swappable power supplies. Link connections can be a
mix of copper and fiber. The chassis contains onboard management of the Link Protectors with a
portfortheNetworkManagementConsole.
3
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

ConfigurationandControl
Each chassis includes a system controller (software-implemented) to configure and control the
Network Protection System. All configuration can be accomplished via a Network Management
Consolethatattachestothemanagementportonthechassis.
Via the Network Management Console, ports can be configured, disabled, and enabled; and the
Link Protector can be forced to its backup link. Forced failover can also be commanded via
SNMP,Telnet,orRS232links.
The management facility polls each Link Protector card every few milliseconds. Alarm conditions
result in visual and audible alarms in the chassis and can be sent to network management
facilitiesviaSNMP(SimpleNetworkManagementProtocol).
Headlessoperation
The system controller in the chassis is not needed for the Link Protectors to provide their link
monitoring and failover functions. The Link Protectors will continue to provide link backup
protectionandpowerfailureprotectionevenintheabsenceofsystemmanagement.
Restoration or rebooting of the system controller has no impact on the links. The links do not
havetobereinitialized;thus,userdataisunaffected.
Upgrades
SystemController
Because of the headless capability of an NPS, the system controller can be upgraded without
affecting network communication. It can be taken out of service, upgraded, and rebooted with no
effectontheactivelinks.
LinkProtectorCards
If theFPGAonaLink-Protector cardneeds tobeupdated,thecardcanbeputintothepower-fail
bypass mode so that communication is not lost. The FPGA on the card can then up upgraded
andthecardreturnedtoservicewithoutaffectingcommunication.
Appliance Bypass Switch
Inline appliances are in use in today’s networks for many reasons – security, intrusion detection,
sniffing, data deduplication. These appliances generally represent a single point of failure in the
network.
Via its bypass technology, Shore
Microsystems protects networks against
appliance failure. Using its Ethernet Bypass
Switch, a card similar to its Link Protectors,
a faulty appliance can be bypassed. In
contrast to the Link Protector card, a
Bypass Switch card has four ports. One
connects to the upstream network and the
other to the downstream network.The other
twoportsconnecttotheappliance.
4
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Normally, traffic flows from the upstream network through the appliance to the downstream
network. However, if the appliance should fail, as determined by no outgoing traffic in the
presence of incoming traffic, the Bypass Switch will disconnect the appliance and will route traffic
directlytothedownstreamnetwork.
Shore Microsystems’ bypass technology has been used by many appliance manufacturers to
protecttheircustomersfrominlineappliancefaults.
Shore Microsystems
Locatedin LongBranch,NewJersey, Shore Microsystems(www.shoremicro.com) was formedin
1984 by two Bell Laboratories engineers for the purpose of designing and manufacturing
networking equipment. Since 1994, the company has focused on network devices to deliver high
availabilitytomission-criticalEthernetnetworks.
Thecompanyhasnumerousclientsinthecommercial,industrial,andmilitarycommunities.
Summary
ShoreMicrosystemsspecializes innetwork devicesthataddsignificantfaulttolerancetomission-
critical Ethernet networks. Its Link Protector products provide 100-microsecond failover for
redundant links to ensure data flow during network failures. Shore’s Bypass Switches route
around failed inline network appliances, such as those used for security, to prevent network
downtimeduetoappliancefaults.
Thecompany’s products currentlysupport link speeds upto onegigabit.It is lookingtoextend its
productlinetotengigabitspeeds.
5
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com