123-Reg Deletes Hundreds of its Hosted Websites
April2016
The U.K. website hosting service 123-Reg accidently wiped out hundreds of its
customers’ websites when it ran a maintenance script with a software bug. The hosting
serviceprovideroperatesan“unmanaged”hostingserviceanddoesnotprovidebackups
for its customers. Though it encourages customers to maintain backup copies of their websites, most do
not.Forthosecustomerswithoutbackupcopies,theirwebsitesmaybeirretrievablylost.
123-Reg
123-Reg is the U.K.’s largest domain registrar and one of its largest
website hosting providers. It has issued 3.5 million domain names and
hosts1.7millionwebsites.
123-Reg operates 115,000 servers in its global data centers. Running on
each physical server are several virtual private servers (VPSs), each
dedicated to one customer. Each VPS hosts several virtual machines
(VMs), each of which hosts a website for the customer owning the VPS. In effect, multiple customers
shareasingleserverthatappearstobeadedicatedsystemtothecustomer.
Most companies hosting websites on 123-Reg are e-commerce businesses relying on their websites for
sales.
Software Bug Wipes Out Hundreds of Web Sites
OnSaturdaymorning, April 16, 2016,123-Regran ascripttofindunused VPSs. Theintent was todelete
old VPSs that were no longer being used. An error in the script showed no virtual machines running on
some live VPSs that were, in fact, quite active with functioning websites. This caused these VPSs to be
deleted. The VPSs on 67 of the 123-Reg servers were wiped clean. As a result, 123-Reg mistakenly
deletedanumberofthe1.7millionsitesithosts.
Whencustomersfirststartedcomplainingthattheycouldnotreachtheir websites,123-Regtoldthem that
it was a connectivity problem. Later, they changed that prognosis to a capacity issue caused by a
customer running resource-intensive tasks that worked around restrictions. It took a day or so for 123-
Reg to realize that the problem was caused by deleted VPSs as a result of their maintenance error. It
took two days for them to admit that there may be catastrophic data loss. Some customers reported that
thefaulthadeffectively“deletedtheirbusinesses.”
At this point, though the service was an unmanaged service, the company committed a large number of
resources to help restore service back to normal as quickly as possible. It retained a leading data
restoration company, Kroll Ontrack, to help it with the process. However, seven days after the incident,
1
©2016SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

only26 of the 67 affectedservers had beenrestored. 123-Regadmittedthat muchof thedata maynever
berecovered.Thosewebsiteswouldbelostforever.
Unless, of course, the customer had backed up its website locally. In this case, the customer could
restore its website on the 123-Reg systems and be back in business. 123-Reg issued a notice to its
customerssaying:
“Customers that have a local backup of their VPS are advised to rebuild their servers. If you are
currently offline and would like to restore from your own backup to save time, we can set you up a
newVPSimage.”
123-Reg Post Mortem
Richard Winslow, the 123-Reg Brand Director, emailed the following explanation to the company’s
customers:
DearCustomer:
I am writing to you to explain what happened to some VPS services on 16.04.16. This email is to
detail what our steps have been. I am committed to open communication with all customers and
wouldliketotakethisopportunitytoexplainindetail.
So what happened to some services? As part of a clean-up process on the 123-reg VPS platform, a
script was run at 7am on 16.04.16. This script is run to show us the number of machines active
against the master database. An error on the script showed 'zero-records' response from the
database for some live VPS. For those customers, this created a 'failure' scenario - showing no VM's
and effectively deleting what was on the host. As a result of our team's investigations, we can
conclude that the issues faced having resulted in some data loss for some customers. Our teams
have been and continue to work to restore. What have we done? We have been working with an
extended team of experts and have left no stone unturned. Our teams have been working long into
the night to restore as much as we possibly can. We have also invested in external consultants to
recover,inthebestwaypossible.
We have recovery running on the VPS servers and some are restoring to new disks. We have also
begun copying recovered VPS images to new hosts and we expect some VPS to be back up and
runningthroughoutthenightandintotomorrow.
Our teams have worked for more than 24 hours and will continue to do so. No stone is being left
unturned.
As the technical teams come back with updates for individual VPS we will communicate updates to
customers.
For those customers with their own backup of their settings and data, if you wish to restore services
yourself you can do this by issuing a reimage command through your 123 Reg control panel, this will
giveyouafreshlyinstalledVPSonanewcluster,whereyoucanrestoreyourservice.
I understand that some customers may have lost some confidence in the service that we offer. So, I
want to explain what we have done to prevent this happening again. We have started an audit on all
cron-jobs and scripts controlling the platform, and associated architecture, so that no script will have
ability to delete images, only suspend. For image deletion for those suspended over 28 days we will
have a human eye to double check. A new platform will be available by the end of the year for
customers which we will provide self-managed and automated snapshot backups, in addition to
architecture technology to backup the whole platform, something that is not available on the current
platform.Ihopethisgoessomewaytowinback yourconfidence.
2
©2016SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

RichardWinslow,
123RegBrandDirector
Of key importance in this message is that 123-Reg will never again delete a VPS without human
approval. Furthermore, the company will be implementing a backup platform so that recovery from a
disastercanbeprovided.
Déjà Vu
Later that same week, web hosting service Squarespace, serving 190 countries and millions of websites,
lostitsentireglobalnetwork.Overamillionwebsiteswentdown.TheSquarespacenetwork wasdownfor
severalhoursbeforeitwasabletoberecovered.
Lessons Learned
The primary lesson to be learned from this outage is more general than just websites. It applies to any
data that is stored on another system not under your control, for instance in the cloud. The lesson is to
always maintain a local copy of the data so that you can restore it if the remote facility should lose your
data.
At the Availability Digest, we maintain our website locally and simply download changes to our hosting
provider.Thus,wealways havetwocopiesofthewebsite.Ifourhostingprovider shouldloseourwebsite,
all we have to do is to reload it. Also, if we should lose our local copy of the website, all we have to do is
touploadacopyfromourhostingprovider.
Acknowledgements
Informationforthisarticlewastakenfromthefollowingsources:
123-RegVPScustomershitbymajoroutage,Bit-Tech;April18,2016.
“Sorry,wedeletedpartoftheinternet’:Erroratdomainhostingservice123-Regseeshundredsof
websitesgoingoffline,DailyMail;April18,2016.
Furiouscustomerstearinto123-regafterfirm’smassdeletionwoes,TheRegister;April18,2016.
UKHostingGiant123Reg‘Deletes’CustomerSites,TechWeekEurope;April18,2016.
123-reg still hasn’t restored customers’ websites after mass deletion VPS snafu, The Register; April 20,
2016.
123-regrestoresjust26serversaftercatastrophicwipe,CloudPro;April22,2016.
AnotherwebhostingdisasterasSquarespacesuffersmajoroutage,ChannelBiz;April20,2016.
3
©2016SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com