WestHost Fire-Suppression Test Fiasco – An Update
September2010
In our May, 2010, Never Again article entitled Fire
Suppression Suppresses WestHost for Days,1 we
related how WestHost, a major web hosting and
dedicated server provider, lost its data center for six days when a fire-suppression system test
wentterriblywrong.Atthattime,itwasnotdetermined whytheaccidentalreleaseofsuppressant
gas caused multiple hard disks to fail. The best guess was the sudden increase in pressure
causedbythegasdischarge.
New tests have now shown that a sudden increase in gas pressure was probably not to be
blamed. Interestingly, it is more likely the noise caused by the fire-suppression system that
causedtheserverdamage.
Let us first review the WestHost story, and then look at the testing procedures that point to this
surprisingconclusion.
The Fire-Suppression Test Gone Wrong
It’s not a good idea to test a fire-suppression system bytriggering it. But that’s what happened to
WestHost. The accidental release of a blast of fire-suppressant gas severely damaged many of
itsserversanddatastores.
On Saturday, February 20, 2010, the WestHost data center underwent a standard yearly test of
its Inergen2 fire-suppression system (a form of dry extinguishing system as opposed to a water-
basedextinguishingsystem).Thisfireextinguishingsystem isdesignedtorapidlyreleaseaninert
gas into the computer room to prevent combustion. Unfortunately, a third-party test technician
failed to follow the published pre-test check list and did not remove one of the actuators that
activates the system. At about 2:20 PM local time, when the system was re-armed following the
test, the actuator fired and triggered the release of a large blast of Inergen gas designed to put a
fireout.
For some reason yet to be fully explained, hundreds of servers and disk storage systems were
severelydamaged.WestHostoperationsimmediatelycametoahalt.WestHost’sstaffsettowork
togetthefailedserversback intooperation.However,manyweresoseverelydamagedthatthey
1FireSuppressionSuppressesWestHostforDays,AvailabilityDigest;May2010.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0505/westhost.pdf
2Inergenisaspecially-formulatedgasdesignedtosuppressfire.Itisprimarilyamixtureofnitrogen,carbondioxide,and
argon.Itisreleasedinsufficientquantitytoreducetheoxygencontentoftheairinthecomputerroomfrom21%tobelow
the 15% concentration required to support combustion. The increased level of carbon dioxide makes people breath
harder,thusmakingthenewairmixturewithareducedoxygencontentsafeforhumans.
1
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

required the replacement of hardware components. Some servers could be repaired with onsite
spares. Others had to wait for spares to be delivered from WestHost’s suppliers via expedited
delivery.
But this was only the beginning of the recovery effort. The repaired servers had to have their
databases restored The next problem then presented its ugly head. The backup drives were in
the same facility as the servers, and many of the backup disks were destroyed. Some RAID
drives were recoverable, and their servers were brought back into service. For others, data
recovery experts were brought in and were able to restore data from some failed drives.
However,somedatawassimplydeemednonrecoverablebythedata-restorationexperts.
The end result of all these efforts was that many shared and hosted services were down for as
longassixdays.
What Happened?
Thiswasatotallyunexpectedevent.Normallywhenafire-suppressantsystem istriggered,itisin
response to a fire. Servers and hard disks are expected to be damaged because of heat and
smoke damage. But why was there such wide-spread damage in the absence of a fire? Was it
the Inergen gas? Was it the sudden increase in air pressure in the computer room? Incidents
such as this are extremely rare, and there is little in the way of formal testing that provides an
answer.3
Subsequenttestshaveuncoveredanunlikelysuspect–noise.
Tests by Siemens
AnEarlyWarning
In 2009, rumors started in the fire-safety industry that hard disks may face problems when fire-
extinguishing systems are activated. Siemens, a world leader in fire safety and fire-suppressant
systems, decided to explore these problems further. Its latest (though probably not final) report4
detailed tests it performed to determine the cause of the detrimental effect of fire-suppressant
systemsonharddisks.
Overpressure
Siemens’ first suspicion was that the sudden increase in gas pressure perhaps caused the
problems.Theysetabouttomeasuredisk performanceundervaryingconditionsofhighpressure
andratesofpressureincreases(thepressuregradient).
Typically, the amount of inert gas released into a room is about half the room volume.
Overpressure flaps limit the overpressure in the room by allowing excess air to be displaced to
the outside. Typical design criteria for the overpressure flaps is about three millibars (standard
atmosphericpressureisabout1,013mbar).
Siemens’assumedthatitmightnotbethemaximumoverpressurecontrolledbytheoverpressure
flaps but rather the pressure gradient. Fire suppression systems using inert gases such as
3Thankstooursubscriber,GregDecklerofBlueChipConsultingGroup,forpointingustothisstudy.Hereportsthatone
ofhiscompany’scustomersrecentlyexperiencedasimilarproblemwhenaninadvertent30%releaseofInergencaused
thelossofabouttwentyharddrives.
4 Potential problems with computer hard disks when fire extinguishing systems are released, Siemens’ Building
TechnologiesDivisionWhitePaper;2010.
http://www.buildingtechnologies.siemens.com/bt/global/en/firesafety/extinguishing/about-sinorix/latest-technical-
findings/Documents/White-Paper-potentia-%20problems-with-computer-hard-disks-V1-1.pdf
2
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Inergen typically release the gas over a period of 60 to 120 seconds. Therefore, Siemens set
aboutmeasuringtheeffectsondiskperformanceofabsolutepressureandpressuregradient.
The pressure test setup is shown in Figure 1. Hard disks from four different manufacturers that
are typically found in data centers were installed in a PC with a disk performance monitor. The
diskswere3.5”SATAdrives,eachwithoneterabyteofstoragecapacity.
PC
performance
monitor
restrictor HDD1 restrictor
pressure
exhaust
in
HDD2
pressure
HDD3 sensors
HDD4
control
and
measurement
PressureTest
Figure1
During the tests, the pressure was increased via a nozzle controlled by a solenoid valve. Two
pressure sensors monitored the pressure. One monitored the absolute pressure, and the other
monitored the pressure gradient. The disks were under constant operation, and the performance
monitorrecordedtheirdatatransfererrorsandlinearandrandomseektimes.
Testedwererunforoverpressuresupto170mbarandpressuregradientsupto30mbar/second,
much greater than what would be expected in actual practice. Even with a 220 mbar
overpressurewithapressuregradientupto100mbar/second,noperformancedegradationofthe
diskswasobserved.
The conclusion drawn from this test is that is very unlikely that overpressure or pressure
gradientscreatedbystate-of-the-artdryextinguishershaveanynegativeimpactonharddisks.
Noise
The question was then raised as to whether the significant noise and vibration created by the
release of the inert fire-extinguishing gas had any effect on the disks. Dry extinguishing systems
create a great deal of noise when activated. Sounders and horns are activated to warn people
beforethegasisreleased.Accordingtocodes,dryextinguishingsystem alarmshavetogenerate
soundlevelsbetween90and120decibels(thisisear-splitting).Inaddition,thereleaseofthegas
isitselfasourceoftremendousnoise.
To measure the effect of high sound levels on hard disks, the test setup shown in Figure 2 was
used.Asoundsynthesizerdrivingaloudspeakerwasusedtogenerate“pink noise”between500
hertz and 10 kilohertz. (Fire suppression systems generally generate “white noise,” which is
distributed evenly over the entire frequency spectrum. A limited frequency-range pink noise was
used in these tests to prevent damage to the loudspeaker). The same disk configuration and
performance monitor as that used in the overpressure tests was used for this test. The loud
speakerwasplacedonemeterfromthedisks.
3
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

sound PC
level
meter
performance
loudspeaker monitor
HDD1
sound
synthesizer
HDD2
HDD3
1meter
HDD4
SoundTest
Figure2
The result was that performance of the disk drives was reduced by 50% at sound levels a little
below 110 decibels, below the maximum sound levels dictated by the standards. At these levels,
temporary malfunction of the disks and damage to some sectors was observed. However, none
ofthediskswererendereduselessatthelevelsofsoundusedinthetest.
Siemans wentonestepfurther andperformedthesametestwitha varietyof actualextinguishing
technologies. They observed the same performance degradation effects as the controlled tests.
Afterthedischargewasfinished,nolossofinformationorharddiskdestructionwasobserved.
The conclusion from these tests was that noise levels created by the warning horns and the
subsequentextinguishingprocesscanhavenegativeeffectsonharddiskperformance.
A graphic illustration of this effect can be viewed at the entertaining YouTube video, Shouting in
the Data Center, in which a technician is shown shouting at a JBOD and measuring significant
diskperformancedegradationasaresult.5
What Can You Do?
These tests are not totally conclusive as they did not result in any actual disk destruction.
However,theypointafingeratthepossibleculprit–noise.
Siemansmakesthefollowingrecommendationstominimizenoiseproblemswithharddisks:
 Select less sensitive hard disk drives or new technologies such as solid state disks that
should not be impacted by high noise levels. Contact your hard-disk vendor to obtain
noise-resistancespecifications(ifthevendorhasevermeasuredthis).
 Encloseharddisksinnoise-proofedenclosures,andkeepthedoorsclosed.
 Replicatecriticaldatatooffsitediskstorage.
 Selectsirenandgasnozzlelocationsthatdonotradiatedirectlyonthediskdrives.
5http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tDacjrSCeq4&feature=player_embedded
4
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

 Muzzlethesirensduringfire-extinguishertests.
Inanyevent, reports of disk problems duetoexcessivenoisefrom fire-extinguishingsystems are
exceedingly rare. If you already have a system in place, Siemens sees no reason for further
action. The protection provided by the fire-extinguishing system far outweighs the possibility of
problemswhenitisactivated.Justbeawareoftheproblemsduringthetestsofthesystem.
Acknowledgement
We would like to thank our subscriber, Greg Deckler of Blue Chip Consulting Group, for pointing
us to the Siemans study following our earlier article and for his observation of a similar situation
experiencedbyoneofhiscustomers.
5
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com