European Bank’s Active/Active ATM Network
June2009
A large multinational European bank uses Base24-atm from ACI (http://www.aciworldwide.com/)
to run its ATM network. For over fifteen years, this network has been managed by an
active/active configuration1 comprising Tandem systems (now HP NonStop servers). During this
time,thebankhasexperiencednomajoroutages,eitherplannedorunplanned,attributabletothe
NonStopsystem,notevenduringthreesystemupgrades.
The ATM Network
Among its retail services, the bank provides ATM services. The ATM
machines offer a variety of features. In addition to providing cash,
these features include reviewing account balances, transferring funds
between accounts, printing statements,payingbills, PIN management,
and even topping up mobile phones. The system, in fact, provides all
of the bank’s retail customer banking services except for Internet
banking.
In addition to its network of ATMs, the bank also services point-of-sale (POS) devices for retail
merchants. So far as the network is concerned, POS devices are made to look like ATMs; and
communicationwiththesedevicesishandledinthesamemannerasitiswithATMs.
Between the 4,000 ATM and POS devices, over 1.5 million transactions per day are processed.
The peak time, interestingly, is seven minutes past 1 PM on the last Friday of each month at
lunchtime,justafterpaychecksareissued.
The Original ATM Network
The original implementation for the ATM network used an active/standby Tandem configuration.
Transaction traffic was carried over two logical networks, NET 1 and NET 2. One logical network
handled the ATMs. The other network carried POS traffic from VISA, MasterCard, and LINK and
connectedtheATMsystemwiththebank’sIBMhosts.
All point-of-sale traffic comes from VISA, with some outgoing traffic being routed to MasterCard.
LINK is a financial clearing house that routes POS transactions between the POS devices and
thebankissuingthecreditcardbeingusedatthatPOSdevice.
The primary Tandem system (Tandem A) normally handled all traffic. Had it experienced a
problem, transaction traffic was rerouted to the standby system, Tandem B, which provided full
functionalitytothenetwork.
1
WhatisActive/Active?,AvailabilityDigest;October,2006.
1
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

TandemA TandemB
Base24–atm
NET2
Standby
System
Base24–atm
NET1
NET NET
1 2
IBM VISA
Hosts
4,000ATMs
Active/StandbyATMSystem
A recurring problem with this system was communication faults. Communication links used the
X25 and LU 6.2 protocols and proved somewhat unreliable. When a network went down, the
ATMs or POS devices suffered an outage. Furthermore, transient errors on the network caused
theATMsorPOSdevicestotimeout,requiringthattheuserreenterthetransactiondetails.
The Move to Active/Active
TheATMSystem’sActive/ActiveConfiguration
To alleviate the communication problems described above, the bank reconfigured its
active/standby system into an active/active pair of Tandem nodes. In this configuration, both
nodes are actively processing transactions against a common application database. Each node
hasitsowncopyofthedatabase,andthesecopiesarekeptinsynchronismviadatareplication.
Each node is sized so that it can handle the entire transaction load should its companion node
fail.
To provide disaster tolerance, the nodes are located at two different sites ten kilometers apart. In
this way,an incidentthatmighttakedownonesite will notcauseatotalsystem failure.Theother
nodeattheremotesitewilltakeoverthetransactionload.
The concept of dual logical networks is maintained. The 4,000 ATMs are split between the two
nodes, with 2,000 ATMs connected to each site. The POS network connecting with VISA,
MasterCard, LINK, and the bank’s IBM hosts is replicated so that there are separate connections
toeachnode.
Thebank refers tothis configurationas AB(logicalnetwork 1onnodeAandlogicalnetwork 2on
nodeB).Ifonenodeisdown,thesystemisrunninginAAorBBmode.
As time has passed, communication-line quality has improved; and the bank has moved away
fromtheoldX25andLU6.2networkstoaTCP/IPnetwork.
2
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

The system is designed to avoid data collisions. Each ATM card has a unique number. Though
multiple cards issued to the same family may carry the same number imprinted on the card, the
magnetic stripe carries additional identifying numbers. Should two transactions come in
simultaneously with the same card number, thus creating a data collision, the transactions are
rejectedasfraudulent.
The splitting of the ATMs between the two nodes ensures that ATM traffic is load-balanced. POS
trafficisalsoload-balanced.VISAtrafficissplitbetweenthetwonodesusingthefirstnumberson
the cards. LINK uses its own algorithm to balance its transaction load. IBM host traffic comprises
periodicfilerefreshesthatdonothaveareal-timeurgency.
Should a node or network fail, all POS traffic is immediately routed to the surviving node so that
there is no interruption in POS transaction processing. Only those ATMs that are connected to
the failed node or network are down. If multiple ATMs are located at a single location, care is
taken to distribute them between the two nodes. Therefore, a node failure will still leave some
ATMs operationalat each multiple-ATMsite.Thedowned ATMs arereroutedtothesurvivingsite
bymakingupdatestotheDNSservers,followingwhichtheATMsarerestoredtoservice.
As of this writing, each node is a ten-CPU NonStop 76000 server. The bank may upgrade the
nodestoNonStopIntegrityserversinthefuture.
MaintainingDatabaseSynchronization
EachoftheATMnetwork nodesis executingtransactionslocally.Thismeansthattheybothmust
have a local copy of the application database, and these copies must be synchronized with each
other. When a change is made to one of the databases, this change must be immediately
reflectedintheotherdatabase.
Database synchronization is accomplished by asynchronously replicating data bidirectionally
between the Node A and B databases. The bank uses the DRNet data-replication engine from
NetworkTechnologiesInternational(www.network-tech.com)toaccomplishthis.
Avarietyoffilesarereplicated.Theyinclude:
3
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

 the Card Authorization File (CAF), which contains the details for each ATM card,
including card transactions and card status (card lost, card blocked, etc.). The CAF
contains 35millionrecords and is updated oneachcardtransaction.Inaddition,theCAF
file is rebuilt from the IBM hosts everysix months and is partially refreshed every month.
A full refresh is made to both Nodes A and B and does not require replication. A partial
refresh is sent to one side and is replicated to the other side. In both cases, refreshing
happensinparallelwithongoingtransactionreplication.
 the M(TLF) file, which is a subset of the Transaction Log File (TLF). The TLF file is the
Base24-atm real-time event log that records all events occurring within the system. The
M(TLF)filecontainsonlythoseentriesthatarefinancialtransactions.
 avarietyoffairlystaticfilessuchasthosethatprovideinformationconcerninginstitutions,
accessauthorization,andencryptionkeys.
NodeorNetworkFailureandRecovery
Should a node or a communication link fail, all transactions can be routed to the surviving node
since it has an up-to-date copyof the application database. As long as the other node is down or
is not connected, the surviving node will process all transactions and will queue the changes that
it makes. Once the downed node is ready to be returned to service, the surviving node will drain
its queue of changes to the downed node, thus synchronizing the downed node’s database. At
this time,the downed node canbereturnedtoservice; andthetransactionload canbe splitonce
againbetweenthetwofunctioningnodes.
This same capability is used to roll upgrades through the system. First, one node is taken down
and upgraded. It is then returned to service, and the other node is taken down and upgraded.
Serviceisneverlosttotheusersofthesystem.
TestingFailover
A major benefit of active/active systems over active/standby systems is that it is known that the
contingency system is up and running. Since the standby system in an active/standby
configuration is idle (or is at least not running the application that it is backing up), there is a
possibility that the failover to the standby system will fail. Testing the standby system is a costly
andriskyoperationandisoftennotthoroughlydonebymanyorganizations.
In an active/active configuration, it is known that both nodes are working since they are both
actively processing transactions. Should one node fail, all that needs to be done is to reroute
transactionstothesurvivingnode.
However, active/active failover should still be tested periodically. For instance, there may be
problems in the mechanism for rerouting transactions. The bank tests failover of the ATM system
twice yearly, failing over to Node A as well as to Node B. This is often done in conjunction with
hardwareandsoftwareupgrades.
Switchover is managed via an operator console developed bythe bank.The console keeps track
ofthestatusofallATMsinthenetworkandalsomanagesthefailoverprocess.
Following the failover to a single node, the operational node continues to replicate data changes
totheothernodeifitisup;oritqueueschangesforlaterrecoveryiftheothernodeisdown.
4
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

TheATMFailoverProblem
Amajoradvantageofactive/activesystemsisthatrecoveryfromanodeornetworkfailurecanbe
accomplished in seconds. However, in the bank’s ATM system, it takes about 45 minutes to
restoreservicetotheaffectedATMs.Whyisthis?
The current ATMs are not network-intelligent. They connect only to a single IP address.
Therefore, in order to switch the ATMs to their alternate node, the network has to be changed.
ThisisdonebymodifyingtheroutingentriesintheDNSserver,aprocessthattakessometime.
This switchover time has been deemed acceptable to the bank since to the customer standing at
the ATM, it is no more inconvenient than when the ATM runs out of cash. If the customer is at a
sitewithmultipleATMs,hesimplyhastomovetoanATMthatisconnectedtothesurvivingnode
andthatisthereforestillfunctional.
The bank may modify the ATMs so that they can switch IP addresses if they get no response.
Each node will have a different IP address for the ATM connections. If an ATM determines that it
is getting no response from the node to which it is connected, it will simply switch to the IP
address of the other node and will resubmit the transaction. With this technique, ATM
connectionscanbereroutedinseconds.
The Bank’s Experience with Active/Active
After fifteen or more years of using an active/active configuration for its ATM network, the bank
hasaccumulatedawealthofexperiencewiththistechnology.
MajorBenefits
 Theproblemswiththecontingencysystemareminimized.Itisknownthatbothnodesare
operational since they are both actively processing transactions. System availability is
improvedsincetherearenofailoverfaults.
 In addition, all communication links are being actively used. The bank knows when it has
a communication-link problem and does not have to wait until it tries to use a backup link
tofindthisout.
 Each node must be configured to handle the entire load should one node fail. Therefore,
during normal operation, each node is handling only half the load, leading to better
performance due to reduced CPU and disk loading. In short, all available capacity is
beingactivelyused.
 Likewise, each communication link is sized to handle the entire transaction load. Since
transaction load is distributedover two links,during normaloperation eachlink is running
athalfcapacity,thusimprovingperformance.
Issues
 System management is more complex. System-management tools have to run on one
nodeandbeabletoaccessandchangeparametersontheother node.Thesetoolsmust
runinAB,AA,andBBmodesasnodesfailandarerestored.
 The 45-minute ATM downtime during a contingency switch is too long. This downtime
should be measured in seconds – short enough so that a customer standing at the ATM
isnotinconvenienced.
5
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

 System sizing is complex. Performance data is taken on a single node on a quiet day(to
minimize the inconvenience of ATM failover downtime). Performance data is also taken
on peak days. It is desired to configure the nodes so that a single node can handle the
peak-day load. The question that arises is how much load can a multi-CPU NonStop
server handle and still perform well. Is it 60%? 80%? Is it dependent upon the NonStop
server model? On the application architecture? This question has not yet been answered
tothebank’ssatisfaction.
FuturePlans
This ATM system is hardly static. The bank is considering several modifications and upgrades to
thesystem.Theyincludethefollowing:
 The time to reconfigure the system from dual-node to single-node operation and back must
be reduced. The correction of this problem requires modifications to the existing ATMs so
that they can detect a fault and automatically connect to the other node by switching IP
addresses. In this way, they can recover from a fault quickly. To return to dual-node
operation, all that is required is for the current host node to drop the connection being used
bytheATMsthataretobeswitchedbacktotheirhomenode.
 The bank feels that it must remove its dependence upon certain in-house file transfer and
replication utilities. They are costly to maintain, and support staff tend to forget how they
work. TheyplantomovethesefunctionstoDRNet.
 The bank is considering upgrading to Integrity NonStop servers in the next several years.
When it does, it may reconsider its use of active/active. The bank’s original motivation for
active/active was tosurvive the high incidenceof communication-linefailures that were being
experienced in the late 1980s/early 1990s. This is no longer a problem with today’s IP
networkinginfrastructure.
The bank is considering moving to a “sizzling hot standby” configuration in which the nodes
are running active/active with bidirectional replication; but all transaction activity is routed to
onlyonenode,withtheother nodeactingas abackup.Thisconfiguration,thebank feels,will
be much easier to manage while still providing the continuous availability and fast failover of
active/activesystems.
Summary
In today’s financial environment, the availability of a bank’s ATM network takes on new meaning.
The public is so wary about the well-being of banks that the failure of an ATM network might be
perceived as a warning that the bank may be about to fail. The result could well be a run on the
bank,whichmightbeaself-fulfillingprophecy–itcouldcausethebanktofail.
This bank moved to a highly-available active/active ATM and POS network many years ago; and
it is well-experienced in the operation, benefits, and issues of the technology. Its active/active
configuration has proven itself in the high availability that it has achieved. The bank has
experienced no planned or unplanned major outages in its ATM network in over fifteen years of
operation. This has been true even in the face of many upgrades, including several major
hardwareupgrades.
The bank has been a pioneer and a leader in the use of active/active technology and is well
positionedtoreapfuturebenefitsofthisimportantexperience.
6
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
