– Our February Twitter Feed of Outages
February 2017
A challenge every issue for the Availability Digest is to determine which of the many
availability topics out there win coveted status as Digest articles. We always regret not
focusing our attention on the topics we bypass. With our new Twitter presence, we don’t
have to feel guilty. This article highlights some of the tweets that made headlines in
recent days.
Lloyds Banking Group Outage – a Correction
In an earlier issue of the Availability Digest, we described an outage suffered by the Lloyds Banking
Group as being the result of a failover fault. Since then, one of our subscribers came forward with a
more accurate description of the outage. Lloyds employed two HP NonStop 16200 systems in an
active/active configuration to process its ATM and POS transactions. The outage was caused by a
simultaneous failure of four out of eight CPU processors in one of the NS16200 NonStop production
servers, which handled 50% of all ATM and POS traffic. The NS16200 server handling the other
50% of traffic was unaffected. The root cause of the failure was finally identified by HP as a rare
firmware bug in HP's Logical Synchronization Module. The bug was so subtle that HP had to take
the affected part back in order to reproduce the failure. Effectively, the failed server was still running
at the point of failure but was ruled as "sick but not dead." This resulted in about 50% of transactions
failing. However, the sick system had not really failed, thus complicating the failover process.
Automatic failover to the other half of the active/active system did not take place. The transaction
traffic had to be switched over manually to the other (unaffected) HP NonStop server.
https://t.co/l30fM34SAU
Ins and Outs of Outage Management
Weather, cybersecurity, customer service. Yada yada yada. It's a wonder that utility pros don't blow
a fuse with all of this.
https://t.co/hY7vZCwC0s
DDoS attacks fingered after Lloyds Bank suffered recent lengthy outage
Lloyds Banking Group is understood to have been the target of a significant denial of service attack
in January, leaving significant numbers of customers unable to access their online banking services.
The attack started at some point on the morning of January 11, preventing customer access to sites
belonging to group members including Lloyds Bank, Halifax, and the Bank of Scotland for at least
the best part of three days.
https://t.co/fpNYIamtnC
1
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

How Sustainable Will Bitcoin Be After the Apocalypse?
Over the past few years, worldwide fears of an apocalypse-type scenario have increased quite a bit.
The trend is likely to be associated with global economic turbulence, failed central planning, and the
rise of tyrannical governance. With people believing doomsday may come to pass, many are
hoarding various commodities like precious metals and now even bitcoins. However, people wonder
how sustainable the Bitcoin network will be throughout a global apocalyptic crisis.
https://t.co/Jm6WD776Av
Delta Air Lines systems outage: 280 flights cancelled but systems now back to normal
Delta Air Lines said it is recovering from a systems outage that caused departure delays and about
170 cancellations on 29 January. Delta said that its "essential IT systems" went down about 6:30pm
on Sunday and was restored a few hours later. It said all systems were back to normal shortly after
midnight on Monday.
https://t.co/LUzLHGL8Ku
The military has just taken satellite backup underwater
What if you have one of the most advanced and bulletproof military communications networks in the
world, but your satellites (like the one above) are still vulnerable to enemy operatives jamming or
hacking your system? You go deep. Really deep.
https://t.co/TvcB0SSSFP
Avaya Bankruptcy Sends Clear Message to Legacy IT Makers
Telecommunications provider Avaya, spun out of AT&T in 2000 and which filed for Chapter 11
bankruptcy protection on Jan. 19, stands as yet another example of what can happen if a company
doesn't move quickly enough when a technology sea change engulfs it. Kodak didn't make the move
to digital fast enough. DEC and Sun Microsystems saw Linux impacting their enterprise server and
PC businesses but were slow in adjusting. Avaya didn't make the move to cloud, messaging and
mobility in a timely manner.
https://t.co/HC0Xh7fRRK
Can Business Applications Be Immune To Network Failures?
Ideally, critical business applications wouldn't be held hostage to network problems and failures.
Unfortunately, this isn’t always the case. There are four primary network conditions that degrade the
performance of business applications: link failures, link degradation, network device failures, and
bandwidth shortages.
https://t.co/uuYgssYyyY
United Airlines computer glitch creates cascade of delays
United Airlines grounded all domestic flights for about two hours on Sunday evening, 22 January,
after a computer glitch struck their system. Leading to six cancellations and 200 delays, it was the
latest IT issue to cause the airline problems in recent months. And United is not the only carrier to
have suffered such setbacks of late, as the complexity of the computer systems in charge make it all
but impossible to proceed when they malfunction.
https://t.co/vLhVkxwkV6
2
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Hidden Figures and the IBM 7090 computer
Hidden Figures isn't just the story of three brilliant and determined women but also of the transition
from human to electronic computing. The latter stars the IBM 7090; and as the movie shows, the
transition was far from smooth.
zd.net/2jE5F0G
Oracle's monster security update: 270 fixes and over 100 remotely exploitable flaws
In January, Oracle released its first quarterly critical patch update of the year, urging customers to
immediately apply the bundle's 270 fixes to a number of its products. Product families fixed in this
update include Oracle Database Server, Oracle Enterprise Manager Grid Control, Oracle E-
Business Suite, Oracle Industry Applications, Oracle Fusion Middleware, Oracle Sun Products,
Oracle Java SE, and Oracle MySQL. Oracle's updates are typically large; but the 270 fixes in this
advisory are just short of Oracle's record critical update last July, which contained 276 fixes.
zd.net/2jnfZHG
Galileo satellites experiencing multiple clock failures
The onboard atomic clocks that drive the satellite-navigation signals on Europe's Galileo network
have been failing at an alarming rate. Across the 18 satellites now in orbit, nine clocks have stopped
operating. Three are traditional rubidium devices; six are the more precise hydrogen maser
instruments that were designed to give Galileo superior performance to the American GPS network.
Galileo was declared up and running in December. However, it is still short of the number of
satellites considered to represent a fully functioning constellation; and a decision must now be made
about whether to suspend the launch of further spacecraft while the issue is investigated.
https://t.co/KI3w3qemty
HPE acquires SimpliVity for $650M in cash
HPE has acquired data management platform SimpliVity for $650 million in cash. SimpliVity is one of
the many companies space focused on what is often called “hyperconverged infrastructure.”
Hyperconverged systems combine compute, storage and networking into a single system. For HPE,
the idea here is clearly to expand its existing infrastructure, automation and cloud services with
SimpliVity’s platform.
https://t.co/9F1vwCKDSM
DOT Watchdog: FAA Not Yet Prepared for Mass ATC Outage
Despite efforts to improve emergency contingency procedures, the U.S. Department of
Transportation Inspector General contends the FAA is still not completely prepared to handle events
that could cause major outages, such as the fire that was deliberately set in the Chicago Air Route
Traffic Control Center in September 2014. The DOT IG stated that belief in a study the watchdog
conducted at the behest of Congress on whether the FAA can manage air traffic control crises that
arise within the National Airspace System.
https://t.co/Q0QMgO377G
3
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Oracle announces new UK, US and Turkey cloud regions, adds product enhancements
Oracle’s new regions, in Virginia, London, and Turkey to be more precise, are expected to go live by
the middle of 2017, while the company expects to add further regions in APAC, the Middle East, and
North America, to be launched a year later. Oracle says that the new regions will comprise at least
three high bandwidth, low latency sites – for which the company code is ‘availability domains’ –
located several miles from each other and designed to be built to avoid failover.
https://t.co/MXDeuJOo0L
“Component failure” caused Amsterdam blackout; Power utility offers cash to those hard
hit
A massive power outage that affected 360 thousand homes in and around Amsterdam on 17
January and left train traffic across the country in chaos was the result of a "component failure" in a
TenneT power station on Hemweg in the Dutch capital.
https://t.co/sQlCqDzQmV
Report: IBM in Talks About Takeover of Lloyds Data Centers
Lloyds Banking Group is in talks with IBM about potentially selling its data centers to the US
company and having it run them as a service provider to the British financial services. The move is
seen as a potential way to raise cash and get some expensive assets off the balance sheet rather
than a way to improve services for Lloyds, which has been undergoing massive restructuring, laying
off back-office and IT workers, and shutting down branches.
http://bit.ly/2l3Sy6I
Tesla Gigafactory Will Have World's Largest Solar Rooftop Array
Tesla is taking full advantage of its ownership of SolarCity, and it will have the world’s largest solar
rooftop array at its Gigafactory. The facility in Nevada will have the capacity to generate 70
megawatts of power thanks to its rooftop solar panel array, which is roughly seven times more than
the current largest installation on a single roof, located in India. Thanks to the incredible scale of the
solar panel array on its roof, along with the setup of Powerpack batteries, Tesla will have a net-zero-
energy production facility that is powered from renewable sources. It will not need to use the Nevada
power grid; and it will not require any fossil fuels, which should make its critics silent on that matter.
https://t.co/nQLhgPupJz
GoDaddy revokes nearly 9,000 SSL certificates issued without proper validation
GoDaddy, one of the world's largest domain registrars and certificate authorities, revoked almost
9,000 SSL certificates in mid-January after it learned that its domain validation system had a serious
bug for the past five months. The bug was the result of a routine code change made on July 29 to
the system used to validate domain ownership before a certificate is issued. As a result, the system
might have validated some domains when it shouldn't have, opening the possibility of abuse.
https://t.co/MLcVNUGbfe
4
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

The looming national security threat everyone keeps ignoring
This week’s U.S. confirmation hearings for homeland security secretary and transportation secretary
were notable for something not discussed: the fact that the two departments have failed for 12 years
to comply with presidential orders to eliminate one of the most serious threats to the security and
economy of the United States.
https://t.co/leIWmN0qNg
How Iran’s efforts to censor porn led to Internet outage in distant Hong Kong
In a world interlinked through the Internet, a small problem can cascade into a full blow outage.
According to a recent report, Iran’s recent attempt to block pornography websites in the country’s
borders hampered access in Russia, Hong Kong and other nations in the region. Iran’s national
telecom authority used a protocol called BGP to block the access of Iranian citizens to the porn sites.
But closing the BGP tap caused severe Internet issues in faraway Hong Kong and Russia.
https://t.co/ppLWltiUoh
Tech industry big guns unite to create crash-free IT services and systems
The Zero Outage Industry Standard Association (ZOISA), which counts Dell-EMC, IBM, NetApp,
SAP and T-Systems as founding members, has released further details of the work it is doing to help
minimise the risk of users suffering from IT service outages.
https://t.co/iSSB4V8nbH
BT customers suffer lengthy broadband outage—rogue router fingered
An unknown number of BT broadband customers across the UK were unable to access the telecoms
giant's network for hours on 2 January —with some claiming that the outage caused by an apparent
DNS error was yet to be resolved.BT told Ars that a "small number of BT Broadband customers had
issues accessing Web pages. This was an issue with a router in our network and has now been
resolved. We apologise to any customers affected."
http://bit.ly/2kL0D3q
Amazon is considering using blimps as huge airborne warehouses
Amazon has already started using drones to deliver products to its customers, albeit on a very small
scale. However, there's one small problem with drone deliveries as it stands: launching drones from
the ground and flying them to people's houses requires a considerable amount of energy. In order to
get around this potential issue, Amazon is looking at storing products at altitude in huge floating
airships — described by Amazon as "airborne fulfillment centers" — and a network of drones to
essentially float items down to people.
http://read.bi/2ihx59r
No excuse for airline system outages
In 2016, as multiple system outages led to long check-in lines, flight cancellations and passengers
camping out in airports, several airlines’ reputations made unplanned descents. What could they
have done differently to prevent these crises or to recover from them more rapidly?
https://t.co/OlQOtCsKbF
5
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Long lines, frustration after U.S. Customs system outage at airports
A U.S. Customs and Border Protection system outage Monday, 2 January, at some airports caused
long lines and delays for those trying to enter the United States. It is unclear how widespread the
outage was; but issues were reported in Miami, Fort Lauderdale, Atlanta and Washington Dulles
International Airport. The outages began around 5 p.m. EST and ended around 9 p.m. EST.
https://t.co/bq4bBhnDD2
Visa and MasterCard are delaying the EMV shift for gas stations
The US EMV migration is occurring in several stages, and the first shift occurred for retailers in
October 2015. For gas stations, that deadline was supposed to be set for October 2017. But
recently, Visa and MasterCard shifted the deadline for gas stations back to October 2020, giving
their fuel clients three additional years to upgrade their pumps.
http://read.bi/2gAjgoN
A lesson from network outages: Redundancy matters
Redundancy is a basic IT tenet. Whether it's multiple back-end servers running the same web
applications or setting up disk drives in RAID arrays, IT regularly ensures availability even in the
case of a failure. Yet the massive DDoS attack against DNS service provider Dyn showed that many
organizations failed to think about redundancy on their critical infrastructure.
https://t.co/QbRWHcjYCN
6
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman
