A Personal Failover Fault
Dr.BillHighleyman
March2013
Availability is all about providing a service, no matter what. The “no matter what” struck me during a
presentation at the Connect OpenVMS Boot Camp, held recently in Bedford, Massachusetts. As editor of
the Availability Digest, I was to give a talk entitled “Help! MyData Center Is Down!” It describes incidents
taken from the Digest’s Never Again series of horror stories, incidents that have incapacitated entire data
centersforhoursandevendays.
As I was booting up the PC on which my slides were stored, I experienced my own horror story. My PC
was taken over by a malicious virus (or so it seemed to me) and became unusable. I was about to
becomeoneoftheincidentsofwhichIwastospeak.
Mytalkendswithlessonslearnedtokeepthebusinessgoinginthefaceofsuchincidents:
1. Employredundancytoprotectcriticalsystemsfromfailurebyfailingovertobackupsystems.
2. Haveafailoverplan.
3. Practicethefailoverplantoensurethatitworksandthatstaffistrained.
4. If all else fails, be sure to have a business-continuity plan that maps out how you will maintain
servicesintheabsenceofITsupport.
5. Communicate with your stakeholders to keep them informed about the problem and your
progressinrestoringservice.
6. After recovery, perform a root-cause analysis; and institute procedures to prevent the problem in
thefuture.
DidIfollowmyownadvice?Let’ssee.
The Production Service
The service that I was to provide was to give mypresentation to a room full of people. To that end, I had
prepared my slide set and had it stored on my PC. I had practiced the talk to ensure that its length was
compatible with the one-hour time slot. In fact, I had previously given the talk successfully several times,
including several Availability Seminars as well as at HP
Discover2012andthe2012NonStopTechnicalBootCamp.
Theprevious speaker finishedontime,andI wenttothefrontof
the room to set up. I plugged in the power cord and connected
my PC to the projector. I turned on the PC; and while it was
booting, I fiddled with the lapel mike to make sure it was
working.
1
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

With the room now full of attendees, I turned my attention to the PC to bring up PowerPoint, select my
slide set, and begin the presentation. The display sprang to life and projected itself on the eight-foot
screen.Andthere,tomyhorror,Isawtheintruder.
The Outage
Well,maybe it wasn’tamalicious virus. Butitmightjustas wellhavebeen. Displayed onthescreen, was
the message “Configuring Windows updates. 5% complete. Do not turn off your computer.” My PC had
been wrested from my control and was useless. So far as the presentation was concerned, my PC was
down.
For some reason, Windows did not give me a warning that it was about to do this. Usually, it asks
permission and lets me delay the upgrade if I want. Perhaps it had given the warning before I shut down
thePCpreviously,andIhadn’tseenit.Inanyevent,panicsetin.
Hopingthat IcouldstopWindows in its tracks,Irebootedthe PC. After acoupleofminutes,itcameback
on; and Windows continued with its nefarious deed. Powering off didn’t work. Even worse, the upgrade
was proceeding painfully slowly. As the entire room tried to contribute a solution, the upgrade hadn’t
progressedbeyond5%.
The Disaster-Recovery System
Fortunately,Ihadpreparedforsuchadisaster.IremembertoomanytimesintheearlydaysofPCswhen
I couldn’t get my PC to cooperate, and I had made it a practice to bring transparencies to use with an
overhead projector if need be. Overhead projectors and transparencies are now a thing of the distant
pass,butfailuresarenot.
My backup strategy is now to replicate my slides to a memory stick so that I can use another PC if mine
shouldbecomeinoperable.Infact,tobesupersafe,Ialwaysbringtwobackupmemorystickswithme.
SonowallIhadtodowastodeployanotherPC.
The Failover Fault
HowdoIacquire another PC?Myplan had always beento ask theaudience if Icould borrowsomeone’s
PC.IamsurethatIwouldhavemultipleoffers.
Unfortunately,I had never testedthis failover plan; and itran intoafairlysimpleproblem.Iforgotthatthis
was my plan. When things go wrong, people (including me) get stupider. In hindsight, I wonder if I would
have been too embarrassed to ask for someone’s computer even if I had remembered. I don’t know.
Again,Ihadnevertestedtheplan.
I froze and watched the screen – “Do not turn off your computer. Windows is 10% completed
reconfiguring.”
2
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

The Business Recovery Plan
Now I was really down. I had lost my production system, and I had been unable to execute a successful
failover to my disaster-recovery system. Fortunately, I had a Business Recovery Plan (BCP) that would
allowmetocontinuetoprovidethepresentationevenintheeventofadualfailure.
The Business Recovery Plan was straightforward. I had printed out a copy of my
slides and had them with me. I was able to begin the presentation byreferring to my
printedcopies.After abouttwentyminutes,Windows finallycompletedits update and
returned my computer to me. I brought up PowerPoint and completed the
presentation with the displayed slides. My total downtime was about five minutes,
andIwasabletofinishontime.
In hindsight, a more effective BCP would have been to bring multiple copies of the
slides with me and pass them out to the audience. Then we all could have had the
benefit of the slide set. However, this is a cost and convenience factor. For the unlikely probability of
having to pass out copies of the slides, is it worthwhile printing and bringing in a large stack of paper?
This is not a very green solution. Besides, how many copies should I print? I have decided not to extend
myBCPtothistechnique.
Stakeholder Communications
In this incident, the stakeholders were those sitting in my audience. Communication was inherent in the
process. Everyone knew what happened, everyone knew what was being done to try to recover, and
everyonewasverysupportive–evenjovial.
The Root Cause
After a failure incident, it is important to perform a root-cause analysis to determine what caused the
outage and what can be done in the future to prevent it. The cause was obvious, but I had no idea as to
how to avoid it in the future. If Microsoft is going to commandeer my computer without my permission,
whatamItodo?
One thought was to kill the Internet connection. This will work if the hijacker is in the process of
downloadingtheupdates. Butif theupdates alreadyhave beendownloaded,IsuspectthattheInternet is
notinvolvedintheconfigurationoftheupdates.
My coworker solved the problem. Searching around, she discovered the program named, amazingly,
“Windows Update.” Windows Update can be accessed from the Control Panel. One of its options is
“Changesettings.”Adrop-downlistprovidesfourchoices:
 Installupdatesautomatically(recommended).
 Downloadupdatesbutletmechoosewhethertoinstallthem.
 Checkforupdatesbutletmedecidewhethertodownloadthemorinstallthem.
 Nevercheckforupdates(notrecommended).
I am now running under option 3. I letWindows ask me if I want to download and install updates, which I
willalwaysdowhenconvenient.NowIhavecontrolofmyPC.
3
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Summary
I write and lecture a great deal on high availability. It is refreshing to see that the principles of achieving
high availability apply even to simple systems and that I got at least a passing grade in applying them. I
wasn’tperfect,buttheservicesurvivedatanacceptablelevel.
4
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com