Hurricane Irma Causes Massive Power Outages
September 2017
When Hurricane Irma slammed into the Florida coast, it caused one of the largest
natural-disaster related power outages in U.S. history. The blackouts were far worse
than those caused by previous hurricanes that hit Florida.
Irma’s Power Outages Worse Than Previous Hurricanes
Hurricane Irma caused far more damage to the power grid than did earlier hurricanes. In 1992, Hurricane
Andrew knocked out power to 1.4 million people. In 2002, Hurricane Wilma caused 3.2 million Florida
Power and Light (FPL) customers to lose power, the largest in the company’s history to that point. In
2012, Hurricane Sandy cut power to 8.2 million households in seventeen states along the Eastern
seaboard.
Irma crushed that record. FPL serves 4.9 million customers, half of Florida’s residents. The storm caused
4.5 million FPL customers to lose power. All in all, half of Florida’s 20 million residents lost power due to
the storm. 80% of FPL accounts in Miami-Dade County were affected, as were 70% of all accounts in
Palm Beach.
Especially hard hit were the Florida keys. The Governor of Florida urged everyone in the keys and in
southern Florida to evacuate to the north, and many did.
Other states up the East Coast suffered as well. One million Georgia residents were without power.
FPL proactively shut down certain substations before they flooded so that they could be recovered more
quickly. It shut down one of its two nuclear reactors near Homestead Air Force Base in southern Florida,
but kept the other reactor active, as it did with its other nuclear reactors across the state.
Irma has set the record for power outages except for two failures that were helped by human failings. In
1965, most of Connecticut, Massachusetts, New York, and Rhode Island lost power when a power line
went down and the remaining lines couldn’t handle the extra load. Thirty million people were affected.
800,000 were trapped in the New York City subways.
A mass outage in 2003 took out power to about fifty million people when an overheated power line
sagged into trees. An emergency alarm system that should have notified staff that a power line was lost
failed. The result was that the power was shifted to the other power lines, which then overheated also and
failed. This resulted in the largest blackout in the history of North America.
1
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

FPL Warned That Restoration of Power Could Take Weeks
FPL warned customers and businesses that restoration of power to more than two million homes could
take weeks. As it did after Category 5 Hurricane Andrew struck Florida in 1992, FPL noted that its crews
could not get out and begin restoration activities until the hurricane had passed.
Power workers came from California, Massachusetts, Texas, Colorado, and Wisconsin to help FPL with
its power restoration efforts.
FPL set priorities for power restoration:
1. Its own power plants, substations, and damaged transmission lines.
2. Critical facilities such as hospitals, police and fire stations, communication facilities, water
treatment plants, and transportation providers.
3. Major thoroughfares that host supermarkets, pharmacies, gas stations, and other needed
community services.
Puerto Rico Gets Hit Hard – Twice
The island of Puerto Rico is heavily in debt. It has accrued more than USD $70 billion in liabilities and an
additional USD $50 billion in pension obligations. Because of this debt, Puerto Rico has been unable to
build resilience into its power grid.
As a consequence, when Hurricane Irma skirted Puerto Rico to its north, a great deal of the Puerto Rican
power grid was decimated, leaving the island with little power. Hurricane Maria followed on the heels of
Hurricane Irma and took out the resto of Puerto Rico’s power infrastructure.
As of this writing, Puerto Rico is totally without power anywhere on the island.
Summary
The effects of many natural disasters such as hurricanes (unlike earthquakes such as the devastating
quake that recently hit Mexico City) give plenty of warning. It is imperative that citizens take precautions to
avoid being harmed. For instance, stock up on food, water, and gasoline – both for your automobiles and
for electric generators. Be prepared to move to upper stories if there is going to be flooding.
And above all, consider evacuation, as many did as Hurricane Irma approached.
Acknowledgements
Material for this article was taken from the following sources:
Irma causes one of the largest natural disaster power outages in U.S. History, Mashable; September 11,
2017.
Hurricane Irma cuts power to nearly 2 million in South Florida; FPL warns of slow recovery, Sun Sentinel;
September 11, 2017.
Hurricane Maria: Puerto Rico left entirely without power, The Telegraph; September 21, 2017.
2
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman
