Let’s Share Outage Information for the Benefit of All
AndrewGallo
SeniorInformationSystemsEngineer
April2014
“It’s impossible to solve significant problems using the same level of knowledge
thatcreatedthem!”–AlbertEinstein
Outages happen - it’s a simple fact of running any type of system, be it network, server, application,
aviation, nuclear, etc. Urs Hölzle, a Distinguished Fellow at Google and it’s first vice president of
engineering, plainly states it this way- “at scale, everything breaks.” Outages are disruptive, potentially
dangerous, and sometimes embarrassing. Much of what we do as engineers is to design systems to
avoid or minimize the chance and impact of these outages. Our vendors and standards bodies design
high availability technologies such as VMWare’s Fault Tolerance or vMotion, the IETF’s VRRP, RAID,
etc. Thisarticleis notaboutthemeritsofanyofthesetechnologies,howtodeploythem,orwhattodoto
recover when they fail. Rather, this is a call to share our lessons learned after an analysis of what the
failure was and how it could have been avoided. The tough lessons learned in these situations are too
valuabletobekeptsecret.1
What Makes a Good Outage Report?
This isn’t a tutorial on why you should write a post mortem or who should be responsible for one. Let’s
focus on the content, the “what.” Plus, there are several methodologies. Having said that, a good report
should contain a detailed description of the event, how it was recognized (e.g., customer reports or
monitoring systems), the scope and severity of the outage, and what was done to restore service, both
temporary (if appropriate) and permanent fixes. A timeline of events leading up to and during the outage
as well as during restoration should be provided. Personnel involved and key decisions (along with their
justificationsandiftheyweretherightdecisions)shouldbeincluded.
The summary should contain a direct cause analysis, contributing cause analysis, and a root cause
analysis. Generally,thesearedefinedas:
 Directcause–whatleaddirectlyorimmediatelytotheoccurrence
 Contributingcause–causesorfactorsthat,bythemselves,wouldnothavecausedaproblem,but
whenpresent,eitherallowedorworsenedtheproblem
 Rootcause–theunderlyingconditionsthatleadtotheoutage. Ifthesecausesweren’tpresent,the
outagewouldnothavehappened. Somebelieverootcausesmustalwaysbetracedbacktohuman
causesorfailings,whereastheothertwocanbepurelytechnical.
Additionally, the summary should include remediation of these causes so that this outage will not be
repeatedinthefuture(atleastbythesamecauses).
1ThisarticlewasfirstpublishedasablogbyAndrewGalloonApril2,2014inPacketPushers.
http://packetpushers.net/outages-suck-lets-share-action-reports/?utm_campaign=blogs&utm_medium=twitter&utm_source=twitter
1
©2014SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Why We Don’t Share
While it’s fairly obvious why we don’t analyze or share such experiences, let’s state them for
completeness. One of the reasons we don’t thoroughly analyze and then share our outage experiences
is the lack of time and resources. We need to get systems up and operational, so documentation is a
luxury.Self-reflectionalsorequiresmaturityinanorganization.Theimmediateoperationalneedtorestore
service, resolve the problem, and move on is often more pressing than analyzing, documenting, and
sharingyourfindings.
Running from one fire to the next, one project to the next, without building a knowledge base of lessons
learned is a sign of a distressed IT shop. This is an organizational problem and we should lead our
organizations to mature to a point where critical self-analysis is part of our routine in order to better
ourselves.
Second, it’s embarrassing. Many of us take pride in the systems and applications we build, and when
theyfailwemighttakeitasasignofpersonalandprofessionalfailure. Alittlehumilitygoesalongwayto
being a confident professional. I would suggest that sharing such information might be a way to combat
professionalloneliness.
Then there are the barriers of security, competition, and liability. A well sanitized report focusing on the
technology goes a long way to address the first two reasons, though there may be times when certain
information can’t be shared. As for the legal issue, that’s tougher, though there are examples that show
howthiscanworkincertaincases.
Examples for Formalized Incident Reporting Systems
There are several examples of formalized incident reports or regular places to share incident reports,
thoughsadly,mostofthemareoutsideoftheinformation&communicationsindustry.
Bob “@strat” Stratton gave an excellent FireTalk at ShmooCon 2014 discussing information sharing,
primarilyfocusedonIT security,byusingthe AviationSafetyReportingSystem asamodelthatshouldbe
followed. The Aviation Safety Reporting System (ASRS) is a voluntary, non-punitive system of reporting
safety and other problems in aviation for the purpose of analysis and dissemination of vital safety
information to the community. According to the presentation, this function was originally under the
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), but because this agency had enforcement powers, people were
not volunteering information. To encourage more reporting and to protect those making reports, this
function was moved to the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) with explicit legal
prohibitionforusinginformationinthesereportsforenforcementaction(see14CFR§91.25).
Still in the aviation arena, Flying Magazine has a long-standing column entitled “I Learned About Flying
FromThat,”where(generallyprivate)pilotscanshareincidentswiththeirpeersinthehopesthatthehard
andpotentiallylifethreateninglessonslearnedbyoneindividualdon’tneedtoberepeated.
More broadly with transportation, the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) publishes voluminous
evidence, investigation notes, and findings of its thorough and scientific investigations of transportation
accidents.
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) has an Event Notification reporting system that requires
licensees to notify the commission of any number of unusual events or emergencies such as
misadministration of radioisotopes formedicaltreatment,nuclear power reactor trips or SCRAMs,loss or
inability to locate exit signs that use tritium continuous lighting without power , and showing up to work
drunkorhigh.
2
©2014SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

The regulated telecommunications industry has a similar system, the Federal Communications
Commission’s Network Outage Reporting System (NORS). Sadly, and unlike the NRC’s reports, these
are not open for public access. The previous version of this system, the Wireline Outage Reports.
focused almost exclusively on local and long distance wireline voice providers. It had been open to the
public, butfor “security” reasons it is now hidden. 47 CFR Part4 lays outtherequirements of what types
of services and organizations are subject to reporting along with the thresholds that triggers a report.
Section 4.2 is what provides the confidentiality, which appears in the regulations starting in
2005. Providers such as AT&T commented on this section stating “The comments establish
overwhelmingly that outage reports should not be made available to the public because such disclosure
wouldcreate graverisks tothe Nation’s critical infrastructuresecurity.” (page 8 in this pdf) One wonders
whatthejustificationforthisactionwasgiventheNRC’sreportsremainingopen.
Earlyinmycareer,Irememberreadingtheseandbeingfascinatedandabitconfused,tryingtofigureout
how the PSTN worked. There were many fascinating reports, including this one, luckily archived, where
SprintfiledareportonaspecialcircuittoArea51.
What We Can and Should Be Doing
First, within our organizations, we should have a regular practice of after-incident evaluation and
documentationfor purposes of improving service availability. Investigations andfindings should be open,
honest,shared,andwhereappropriate,remediationsimplemented.
Second, we should share these findings and experiences with our colleagues outside our
organizations. As mentioned above, some industries have formalized (and required) reporting
mechanisms. Short of that, blogs such as this one, mailing lists such as Outages with its associated wiki
page (though these are primarily concerned with planned & unplanned outage notification), or the North
American Network Operators Group might be appropriate places to share such post incident
experiences. The Availability Digest (@AvailabilityDig) is also a good resource for sharing articles on
failuresandlessonslearned.
I’ll go back to the nuclear industry, which seems more open than our own, to quote from a report written
for the The National Diet of Japan, “The official report of The Fukushima Nuclear Accident Independent
InvestigationCommission:”
“A global perspective should be emphasized, so that the results and conclusions willhelp to prevent
nuclearaccidentselsewhere.”
Thisisanextremecaseofadeadlyaccidentwiththeoutputsharedwiththeworldtoavoiditsrepetition.
Maybe I’m being a bit naive in thinking that we can look past embarrassment, competition, and liability in
ordertochallengeandteacheachothertobebetterengineers.
AndrewGallo
SeniorInformationSystemsEngineer
Andrew Gallo is a Washington, DC based Senior Information Systems
Engineer and Network Architect responsible for design and
implementation of the enterprise network for a large university. Areas of
specialization include the University's wide area connections, including a
150 kilometer DWDM ring, designing a multicampus routing policy, and
business continuity planning for two online datacenters. Andrew started
during the internet upswing of the mid to late 90s installing and
terminating fiber. As his career progressed, he has had experience with
technologies from FDDI to ATM, and all speeds of Ethernet, including a
recent deployment of several metro-area 100Gbps circuits. Focusing not
only on data networks, Andrew has experience in traditional TDM voice,
3
©2014SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

VoIP, and real-time, unified collaboration technologies. Areas of interest include optical transport,
networkvirtualizationandsoftwaredefinednetworking,andnetworkscienceandgraphtheory.
4
©2014SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com