On Blogs and Discussion Groups
October2007
An important part of your professional development and advancement is keeping up with where
your industry is heading and with the technology pertinent to your industry. There are many
avenuesfordoingthis–books,magazines,newsletters,andconferences,tonameafew.
But an often overlooked avenue is the many discussion groups and blogs that permeate the
Internet. These afford an opportunityto not onlylearn about what is going on and to get answers
toyourquestionsbutalsotocontributetotheneedsofothersthroughyourownexperience.
Our focus in the Availability Digest is on continuous availability, and we often visit blogs and
discussiongroupsthatpertaintohighavailability. Followingisalistofsomeofthesethatmaybe
ofvaluetoyou.
ITUG Connection: Real-Time View
ITUG Connection: Real Time View (http://itug-connection.blogspot.com/) is a new blog that
focuses on the HP NonStop community (ITUG was formerly the International Tandem User
Groupandrepresents theinternationalHPNonStopuser community).WrittenbyRichard Buckle,
former Chairman of ITUG, his blog includes high-availability business issues that transcend any
oneusercommunity.
Thisblogfocusesonthreethemes–platforms,attributes,andbusinessintelligence:
 “Platforms” is taken in the broader sense and includes topics such as blades, open
systems,andtheservice-orientedarchitecture.
 Attributes,orfundamentals,includeavailability,scalability,andsecurity.
 Businessintelligencefocusesonlarge,high-performancedatabases.
With respect to availability, Richard states, “I am pretty passionate about this topic and truly
believe it is themostimportantproductdifferentiator.” Hegoes on tosay,”Availabilitytouches all
of our lives today and has an influence over many of the decisions we take on technology, so I
can’tbelieveIwilleverrunoutofsubjectmatterforthiscolumn.”
Richard welcomes comments on his rather extensive postings. He also writes an op-ed column
entitled“RealTimeView.”fortheITUGConnectionmagazine.
comp.sys.tandem
Tandem folks (now HP NonStop) maintain a very active discussion group on Google
(http://groups.google.com/group/comp.sys.tandem/topics). Most of the postings are questions
1
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

that get almost immediate multiple responses. There is also some event information, such as
regionalgroupmeetings.
comp.sys.stratus
This Stratus discussion group(http://groups.google.com/group/comp.sys.stratus/topics) covers all
of Stratus’ hardware products, including ftServer, Continuum, IBM System 88, and Olivetti CPS-
32, as well as Stratus’ various operating systems and any other software that runs on these
systems.
John Bennett’s Blog
Another blog from the HP world is that of John Bennett. John is HP’s Worldwide Director for
Business Continuity and Availability Solutions. His blog is generally vendor neutral and focuses
onbusinesscontinuityissues.Itcanbefoundat(http://h20325.www2.hp.com/blogs/bennett/).
Hecharacterizeshisblogasfollows:
“Keeping the enterprise and its IT systems up and running in the face of risk and potential
disruption is a critical requirement. So is the need to provide your IT users the excellent service
they need. You need to keep up-to-date with emerging risks, risk mitigation and management
approaches, technology trends related to high availability and business continuity, and best
practices. I hope that my blog will give you insight into these issues and help make your job
easier.Yourthoughtsonmyviewsarealwayswelcome.”
The Risks Digest
The Risks Digest (http://catless.ncl.ac.uk/risks) is a forum on risks to the public in computers and
related systems. It is sponsored by the ACM (Association for Computing Machinery) Committee
on Computers and Public Policy. Through a useful index, it links to hundreds of Risks Digest
issues dating from 1985. Topics cover a wide range of risks, from system failures to data theft
andlegalissues.
ItsassociatedRISKSForumisamoderateddigest.ItsUSENETequivalentiscomp.risks.
The Disaster Recovery Forum
The Disaster Recovery Forum (http://www.rothstein.com/wwwboard/forum.html) is hosted by
RothsteinAssociatesandtheRothsteinCatalogonDisasterRecovery. Itisintendedasavehicle
for business continuity professionals and novices alike to share ideas, experiences or concerns,
raise issues, and seek assistance or inspiration on business continuity matters. You can join any
ofthetopicsorstartanewoneofyourown.
A useful extension of this site is a list of links to other sites dealing in continuous availability.
Theselinksmaybefoundat(http://www.rothstein.com/links/arch/rothstein_recommended7.html).
SQL Server High-Availability Forums
HerearetwoSQLServerdiscussionforumsthatdealwithhighavailability.Theseare:
SQLServerClusteringforum–
http://groups.google.com/group/microsoft.public.sqlserver.clustering/topics
SQLServerreplicationforum–
http://groups.google.com/group/microsoft.public.sqlserver.replication/topics
2
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

These forums are actively monitored by Hilary Cotter, Rodney Fournier, and Geoff Hiten, among
others.Thesepeopleareallpublishedandrecognizedauthoritiesintheseareas.
Note:Thedisparityinthewaytheterm “active/active” isusedintheclusteringcommunityandthe
way that we use it is clear from manyof these postings (see our May, 2007 article, Active/Active
VersusClusters).
The SQLTeam.com
The SQLTeam.com (http://www.sqlteam.com/forums/) is a SQL server forum that is well
organized into topics. Two of these topics are Replication and High Availability. The High-
Availabilityforum covers clustering, database mirroring, log shipping, and backup issues for SQL
Server.
VMWare Communities
Virtualization is being touted as an upcoming key technology for continuous availability. The
leaderinvirtualizationforindustrystandardserversisVMWare.
VMWare hosts a set of services for VMWare communities. These include personal blogs,
collaborative wiki documents, and discussion threads. Watches can be set on discussions,
documents,andblogs.
VMWareCommunitiescanbeaccessedat
(http://www.vmware.com/communities/content/quicktour.html.
What Else Is There?
This, I am sure, is only a partial list of forums dealing with high availability. Many of you may
participate in others. If you do, would you please email me at editorest.com and
letmeknowofthem?Thanks.
3
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
