Everbridge Emergency Notification
July2014
Everbridge (www.everbridge.com) focuses on providing emergency/mass notification
services(EMNS)viaasimplifiedsemi-automatedmass-notificationplatform.
The inherent nature of an emergency or other critical incident means that the normal
routine business of an organization or a public sector will be disrupted. Key to the
successful coordination of resources to manage an incident is effective communications. This is the role
oftheEverbridgeEMNScommunicationsplatform.
The Need for Emergency Notification Services
Corporations and public sectors have different needs for crisis communications. Corporations deliver
goods and services and must be able to communicate with their employees, contractors, suppliers, other
stakeholders,andlocalemergencyservices suchas medical,fire,andpolice.Communicationneedsmay
range from office closings due to inclement weather to IT outages and to fires, floods, or explosions at
corporatefacilities.
Public sector notifications must reach the populace in general. They may range from school closings to
shootersintheareaandwillbedirectedtoaspecifiedlocality.
Both populations must be served in the event of area-wide catastrophes such as earth quakes, forest
fires,andwide-spreadflooding.
Thebottom lineisthat,nomatterwhereemployees,contractors,or residentsarelocated,theresponsible
authorities mustbeableto reachout andcontact them,tooffer help and direction, andtohear from them
about their situations and needs. What is needed is a reliable central communication hub with one
interface for every emergency or mass notification need, coupled with a well-thought-out and tested
communicationplanforanycrisis.
TheEverbridgesuiteofnotificationproductsfulfillstheseneeds.
Are emergency notification services really needed? A recent survey by the Gartner group1 yields a
resounding yes! The number of annual incidents reported by the respondents to the survey indicated the
followingnumberofannualincidentsthatresultedintheuseofEMNSsystems:
None 8% 20-49 10%
1-4 20% 50-99 4%
5-9 20% 100-199 5%
10-19 13% 200ormore 20%
1MagicQuadrantforU.S.Emergency/MassNotificationServices,GartnerGroup;March31,2014.
1
©2014SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

The Everbridge Product Suite
The Everbridge product suite provides a communication platform that allows an organization to easily
communicate with selected recipients. Each recipient can respond to verify that it received the message,
andrecipientscanalsoinitiatedunsolicitedmessages.
Mass communications can be to predefined lists or to targeted geographic areas. Communications is
mademoreefficientbymessagetemplatesthatonlyrequirethefilling-inofvariableinformation.
IncidentManagement
The Everbridge product suite provides the facilities to ensure rapid notification to the people who must
take action to resolve a crisis. It allows organizations to automate communication processes according to
preconfiguredrules,thusreducingthelikelihoodofcostlyhumanerrors.Thereisnoconcernthatacritical
person will be left out. The use of predefined message templates ensures that messages will not be
confusingandwillbeinterpretedinthesamewaybyallrecipients.
When an incident occurs, simple drop-down menus allow the selection of the incident type and access to
message templates appropriate to that incident. The user simply has to select the incident type and a
message template, fill in the required information, select the predefined list of recipients, and send the
notification.Messagescanbesentthataretailoredtodifferenttargetaudiences basedontheirroleinthe
organization.Thenotificationprocessissimple,rapid,anderror-free.
A notification message may be sent to recipients over any number of channels, including voice, email,
text messaging (IM), SMS, fax, pager, and others. Communication may be via land line to fixed
telephones or terminals or to mobile devices. Each recipient can specify one or more means for
communicationinpriorityorder.
Anaudittrailofwhatactuallyoccurredismaintainedtoprovethattherightpeoplewerenotified,torecord
theirresponsesandunsolicitedmessages,andtoprovideatimeframeofallactivity.
Areal-timedashboardshowsthecurrentstatusofallactivity.
Consequently,withtheEverbridgeEMNSsystem,
 keypersonnelcanbenotifiedinminutes.
 nonessentialbutaffectedpersonalcanreceivecriticalinformationabouttheevent.
 managementcanfocusoncriticaldecisionmakingratherthanmessagedelivery.
 humanerror,misinformation,andrumorscanbebettermanagedandcorrected.
 adocumentednotificationlogisprovidedforreal-timeandpost-eventmanagement.
MessageTemplates
A key to the success of the EMNS system is the creation of predefined message templates. These are
partofanoverallcrisiscommunicationplanthatmustbeestablishedbytheorganization.
Thefirststepinthecommunicationplanistodefine:
 whoneedsinformation.
 whatinformationisneeded.
 whenistheinformationneeded.
 whatisthebestmeanstocommunicatetheinformation.
 wheremightrecipientsbelocatedatthetimeofanemergency.
 whoshouldbethesourceforcertainemergencymessages.
2
©2014SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

The communication plan should cover the six stages of a crisis. Each will require its own communication
proceduresandmessages.Thesixstagesinclude:
 Warning–indicationsarereceivedthatanincidentisinprogress.
 RiskAssessment–determinetheseverityoftherisktotheorganizationcreatedbytheincident.
 Response–determinetheresponsetocontaintheincident.
 Management–followtheresponsestrategyandmakecorrectionsasnecessary,
 Resolution–recognizewhentheincidenthasbeencontainedandnolongerpresentsarisk.
 Recovery–recoverfromanyilleffectscausedbytheincident.
Everbridgeprovidesguidanceforthecreationofsuitablemessagetemplates:
1. Craftmessages in advance for all crises and emergencies that you can conceive. Themessages
providefill-in-the-blanksforvariableinformation.Asanexample,
“Our offices at <address> will be closed from <date> to <data> due to <reason>. Please
workremotelyasefficientlyaspossible.
2. Follow Robert Chandler’s 3-3-30 rule (Robert Chandler is a recognized expert in crisis
communication):
-Nomorethan3messagepoints.
-Deliver3shortsentences.
-Keepthekeycontenttothefirst30words.
3. Keep the message simple. When things go wrong,
people get stupider. A crisis message should be written
at the sixth-grade level to ensure that it can be quickly
digested. To determine the grade level of a message
written in MicrosoftWord, go the File tab, select options
and then proofing, and check the boxes for “check
grammar with spelling” and for “show readability
statistics.” Then go to the Review tab and select
Spelling and Grammar Check. The resulting display will
showthegradelevelofthemessage.
4. Themessagesmustmatchthesixstagesofacrisisasdescribedabove.
5. Chose words that are suitable for the culture. For instance, some phrases in the U.S. have a
totally different meaning in the U.K. (Example: warm spotted dick, a British pudding; bonnet – a
hatintheU.S.acarhoodintheU.K.;bespoke–customizedintheU.K.,nomeaningintheU.S.).
Don’tuseacronyms,abbreviations,orwordswithmisleadingconnotations,.
6. Createlogicalgroupingsofrecipientsandcraftspecificmessagesforeachgroup.
7. Test the communication plan, fix the problems, and train your people in its use. Schedule regular
mockscenarios.
8. Includesendandreceivemodels,inwhichtherecipientconfirmsthereceiptofamessage.
9. Determine the communication modes for the messages, such as voice, SMS, email, IM, Twitter,
Facebook.
Everbridge has compiled a library of message samples for 30 use cases that is available to Everbridge
customers.
3
©2014SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

SelectingRecipients
Once a message has been selected and completed for an incident, the recipients for that message must
bedetermined.Thisisamajorfunctionofthecommunicationplan.
There will probably be several groups of recipients for each phase of a crisis. Recipient groups can be
defined by lists. These lists can be for employees, distributed staff, customers, suppliers, emergency
personnel,andsoforth.
Recipients can also be selected by location. For
instance, a notification message might be sent to a
particular address,toallin a zipcode, or toall withina
certainradiusofagivenpoint.
With Everbridge’s GIS (Geographic Information
System) technology, an interactive map can be
displayed on aterminalor ona mobile device showing
the location of various potential recipients. The
recipientscanbeselectedfromthemap.
MobileCommunications
The use of mobile devices such as smart phones and tablets is especially important so that an individual
can be contacted wherever he may be – in the office, at home, traveling, or on vacation. Plans have to
takeintoconsiderationthattheInternetmaynotbeavailable.
Everbridge’s mobile apps allow a recipient to confirm that he has received a message. Mobile users can
also generate unsolicited messages. These might include, for instance, pictures and other information
fromthesceneofanincidentorarequestforhelp.
The mobile apps support GIS geographic displays to aid in the selection of recipients of messages
generated by the mobile device. Mobile devices supported include iPhones, iPads, Android devices, and
BlackBerrydevices.
SocialMedia
The Everbridge services include the monitoring of social media such as Twitter and Facebook. This is
useful,for instance, to determineimpassable roads during amajor storm.Using GISfacilities,alerts such
asthesecanbeshowntotherecipientonamapdisplayedontherecipient’smobiledevice.
WeatherAlerts
EverbridgeautomaticallydeliversweatheralertstoitsusersviaitsSmartWeatherAlertingfeature.Ituses
information form AccuWeather and Weather Decision Technologies to determine what alerts to send to
whom. An alert includes the detail of the threat, start and stop times, and the geographical area covered.
Using its GIScapabilities, SmartWeather Alertingdelivers amapof thealert onlytothoserecipients who
needtoknow
InteractiveVisibility
With all of the above features, the Everbridge EMNS platform provides interactive visibility of an incident.
Itintegratesrecipientfeedback,externaldatafeedssuchasweather,andsocialmediasuchasFacebook
and Twitter into a single view of the incident and the progress towards its resolution. It allows decision
makers to make better informed decisions and communicate these strategies efficiently to designated
recipientsusinginformationfrommultiplesources.
4
©2014SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

TheEverbridgeNetworkAccess
As an extension to the Everbridge EMNS capabilities, the Everbridge Network Access facility allows
critical information and updates to be shared with impacted and interested stakeholders outside of the
user’s existing contact databases. Unconnected groups can now access the latest critical information
fromverifiedlocalresources.
The Everbridge Network Access facility allows diverse groups to coordinate their activities to ensure that
therearenoconflictingmessagessenttotheirrecipients.
Availability
Everbridge runs ten production centers hosted in the U.S., U.K., and Canada. Any data center will
automatically fail over to another data center should it fail. Any data center can act as a recovery center
foranyotherdatacenter.
With this extensive infrastructure, Everbridge guarantees 99.99% uptime (an average of 50 minutes of
downtimeperyear).
Everbridge at Top of Gartner’s Magic Quadrant for U.S. EMNS Systems
EverbridgehasearnedthetopspotinGartner’sMarch,2014,MagicQuadrantofU.S.EMNSsystems.2
GartnerMagicQuadrantforU.S.EmergencyMass/Notification
Services
2Seereference1.
5
©2014SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Summary
The Everbridge Emergency/Mass Notification platform provides simple and reliable facilities for
communicating with appropriate personnel during emergencies and other incidents. With its message
templates andpredefinedrecipientlists,themanagementof acompany’s responsetoanincident is rapid
andprotectedfromhumanerror.
Everbridge has been particularly active in the areas of business and consumer services, higher
education,oilandgas,financialservices,government,andhealthcare.
6
©2014SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com