The node can send supervisory messages over the user
network to the clients that it wishes to acquire, as shown in replication
Figure 5. These messages are commands to the clients to
switch the IP address to which they are directing traffic to
theIPaddressofthenodedoingtheacquisition.
IP1 IP2
switch
This technique requires that the clients have enough toIP2
intelligence to be able to process these messages and to active backup
switch IP addresses. If there are many clients and there is connection connection
no multicast or broadcast capability for the acquiring node
to easily reach all of the impacted clients, then individual
takeover messages will have to be sent by the acquiring
CommandingClient
node. This process could introduce an undesirable delay in
Figure5
thefailoverprocedure.
CommandingRouters
Iftheclientsintheactive/activenetworkhavenospecialnetworkintelligence,theyknowonlyhow
to connect to a single IP address. This IP address can be a virtual address that does not
correspond to any particular nodal address. Rather, it is the responsibility of the routers in the
networktotranslatethevirtualIPaddressintoarealIPaddressformessagedelivery.
Theadvantageof usingavirtualIPaddress is thatnetwork routingcanbemanagedtodetermine
to which real IP address a virtual IP address should be routed. This routing can be changed to
rerouteusersfromonenodetoanother.
Thus, a node may send directives to routers in the network to redirect traffic destined to a virtual
IPaddress from thefailedreal IP address to its real IP address.This rerouting depends uponthe
routershavingthecapabilitytoacceptsuchdirectivesoverthenetwork.Thistechniquesolvesthe
problems associated with the client-command technique. The clients do not have to have any
specific network-redirection capability. They continue to send messages to a common virtual IP
4
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

address. It is the routers that translate the virtual IP address to a specific node’s IP address.
Furthermore, network traffic created by rerouting commands is reduced since these commands
needbesentonlytotherouters,nottoalloftheclients.
GratuitousARP
Another wayin whicha virtualIPaddress maybemigratedto another nodeis to useagratuitous
ARP.TounderstandagratuitousARP,itisfirstimportanttounderstandtheARPprotocol.
ARP is the Address Resolution Protocol used by routers and hosts to maintain in their cache a
mapping of IP addresses to device interface addresses on the subnets to which they are
connected. A device interface address is typically a media access control, or MAC, address
provided by a network interface card (NIC). This mapping allows the router or host to determine
to which physical device it should send a datagram that it has received based on the destination
IP address in the datagram. Routers will periodically send their routing tables to neighboring
routers. In this way, routing tables are self-discovering. They always keep up-to-date on the
currentnetworktopology.
Since every router or host on a subnet can listen to all datagrams, the source and destination
IP/MAC address pairs in each datagram are used by the routers and hosts on the subnetwork to
updatetheircacheswiththeIP/MACaddressmapping.
If ahostdoes nothavea destinationonits subnetto whichtoforward an incomingmessage with
a specified IP address, it broadcasts an ARP request over its subnet and asks for the MAC
interface on the subnet that is servicing that IP address. The appropriate device will respond to
thesender with its MAC address.As with anydatagram,theARPrequest and replywillcause all
routing tables to be updated with the source and destination address pairs contained in those
datagrams.
A gratuitous ARP3 is a form of ARP request in which the sender asks for the MAC address
correspondingtoitsownIPaddress.Asdescribedabove,theARPrequestwillcarrythesender’s
IP address and its MAC address. Even though a reply to the ARP request will probably not be
received, each router on the subnet will update its routing table by associating that IP address
with the MAC address of the sender. Thereafter, any traffic destined for that IP address will be
sent to the sender’s MAC address. Sending a gratuitous ARP request is the mechanism often
usedbyahosttoadvertiseitspresenceonasubnet.
However, the gratuitous ARP can also be used to seize an IP address from another host. If a
nodeinanactive/activesystemdeterminesthatanothernodeisdown,itcanreroutethevirtualIP
address of the users serviced by the downed node by sending out a gratuitous ARP advertising
that it is now the destination for that IP address. Thereafter, all traffic from that virtual IP address
will be forwarded to the new node. That node has redirected all users connected to the failed
nodetoitself.
The use of gratuitous ARP to redirect users to a surviving node is shown in Figure 6. (In this
figure, redundancy of network components is not shown for simplicity; but in a highly-redundant
architecture,subnets1,2and3,routers1and2,andtheNICswouldbereplicated.)
There are two nodes in the active/active network – Node 1 and Node 2. The community of users
in Figure 6 is separated into two sets. One set of users connects via Subnet 1 to Router 1 using
thevirtualIPaddressIP0a.TheothersetofusersconnectsviaSubnet2toRouter2usingvirtual
IP address IP0b. The routers and nodes can talk to each other over Subnet 3, which is a logical
3W.RichardStevens,TCP/IPIllustrated,Volume1,AddisonWesleyLongman;1994.
5
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

LAN bridged over a WAN to connect the nodes. The nodes use separate redundant data-
replicationlinksfordatabasesynchronization.
Node1 Node2
dualreplication
andheartbeat
network
bridgedLAN
NIC (*) NIC
remap
IP1 IP0a IP2
ubnet3 IP2
*gratuitousARP
Router1 Router2
IP0a IP0b
Subnet1 Subnet2
user1
GratuitousARP
Figure6
Duringnormaloperation,Router1connectsallIP0atrafficgeneratedbytheusersonSubnet1to
Node1.Likewise,Router2routesallIP0btrafficgeneratedbytheusersonSubnet2toNode2.
However, should Node 1 fail, Node 2 issues a gratuitous ARP advertising that it is now the
destination for all IP0a traffic. Router 1 will update its routing table (as will Router 2, but this is
inconsequential) so that all traffic received from Subnet 1 with a destination address of IP0a will
now be routed to the MAC address of Node 2. Node 2 has now seized all of the users originally
connectedtoNode1.
When Node 1 is restored to service, it will send the equivalent gratuitous ARP to return its users
toit.
DNS Redirection
There is one additional redirection method to discuss, and that is using DNS (Domain Naming
Services) redirection. Often, when a client wants to access a remote server, it knows that server
via a URL (Universal Resource Locator). A URL is an easy-to-remember name, but is
meaningless to an IP network.The URL must be converted to the destination node’s IP address.
This is the function of the DNS server. Every network has a DNS server (typically in a redundant
configuration)orusestheDNSservicesofthenetwork’sISP.
Therefore, one way to reroute users to another node is to have them address the server via a
URL. Each user request will then be mapped to an IP address byconsulting the DNS server. If it
is desired to route the user requests to another node, all that needs to be done is to modify the
URLmappingintheDNSserversothattheURLpointstothenewIPaddress.
While this technique is simple to implement, it has one big problem. DNS entries are cached for
fast access. It may take several minutes for a DNS update to be reflected in the DNS cache.
During this time, URL requests will still be routed to the old node. Thus, continuous availability
cannottypicallybeachievedwithDNSredirection.
6
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Summary
Continuous availability requires that there be rapid and reliable recovery from a fault. Recovery
mustbefastenoughsothatusersareunaware,oratleastarenotinconvenienced,bythefault.
Faultrecoverygenerallyrequiresseveralsteps:
 Thefaultmustbedetected.
 Thecauseofthefaultmustbedetermined.
 Itmustbedecidedwhetheritisfastertofailovertothebackupsystemortotrytorecover
thefailedsystem.
 Managementapprovalmayberequiredtodoafailover.
 Thefailoverproceduremustbeinvoked.Thiscanrequire:
o rebuildingthedatabase.
o startingapplications.
o reconfiguringthenetwork.
o testingthebackupsystembeforeputtingitintoservice.
Itisforthesereasonsthatfailovercanoftentakehours.
With active/active systems, once a fault is detected, there is no need to concern oneself with the
other steps. Just fail over. It is known that the system to which you are failing over is operational
becauseitisalreadyprocessingtransactions.
Failover itself, whether using user redirection, network redirection, or server redirection, can be
very fast. It can be achieved in subseconds. The costly step from a time viewpoint is fault
detection.
Therefore, to achieve continuous availability, the rapid detection of faults is imperative. We have
described in this series various ways that faults can be detected – by clients, by routers, by
nodes. The secret to fast failover is to localize the failover logic to the device doing the fault
detection. If the client is detecting faults, the client should initiate the failover. The same is to be
saidofroutersandnodes.
Some fault detection approaches are proactive and some are reactive. A proactive approach can
determine a fault and can failover before many users are affected by the fault. Heartbeats and
router detection of downed paths are examples of proactive fault detection. A reactive approach
detects a fault when it causes a user request to fail, The sensing of a fault by a client due to a
rejected transaction is an example of reactive fault detection. Clearly, proactive approaches will
providebetteravailabilitythanreactiveapproaches.
7
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com
