JPMC Downed by Replicated Corruption
November2010
JPMorgan Chase is a big bank. It is one of the big four in the United States, along with Bank of
America, Wells Fargo, and Citigroup. With over $2 trillion in assets, $100 billion in revenue, and
over 200,000 employees, JPMorgan Chase forms an important part of the backbone of
commerceintheUnitedStatesandintherestoftheworld.
If the bank’s operations are compromised, it is felt by millions of customers. In September, 2010,
exactly this happened when the bank lost for three days its online banking services used byover
16milliononlinecustomers.
The System that Failed
Theproblem occurredinalargeOracledatabase.ThedatabaseismanagedbyanOraclecluster
comprising eight Solaris servers, each with 64 GB of RAM. Mirrored EMC SANs provide the data
storage.Thedatabaseholdsauthenticationdataanduserprofilesforitsonlinecustomers.
It appears that an Oracle bug corrupted key files in the authentication database. This corruption
was dutifully replicated by the EMC SANs so that both the active and mirrored SANs were
corrupted.Withnoauthentication,theonlineapplicationsbecameinaccessible.
The Outage
The data-center operations staff became alerted to problems early Monday evening, September
13. Shortly thereafter, the applications crashed. Users trying to log on to their accounts were
greetedwithamessagethatsimplyadvisedthemto“logonlater.”
In addition to online banking services, connection to the ACH (Automated Clearing House) for
scheduled payments was lost as well as access to private-client trading portfolios. Online loan
applications died. Web and mobile applications were down. However, ATMs, branch services,
andcallcenterswerenotaffected.
ServiceswerenotrestoreduntilWednesdaymorning.
Thebank’sonlyexplanationwasapostednotethatsaid:
“A third-party database company’s software caused a corruption of systems information,
disabling our ability to process customer log-ins to chase.com. This resulted in a long
recoveryprocess.”
1
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

The Recovery
Because both the active and standby data storage units were corrupted, the bank’s only option
was to rebuild the database. Its last backup had been taken the previous Saturday night. This
backupwasloadedontothedatabase.
Thedatabasewasthenbroughtintoacurrentstatebyreplayinglosttransactions from theOracle
replay log. 874,000 transactions were replayed, requiring most of the day Tuesday. The system
wasfinallybroughtbackonlineearlyWednesdayshortlyaftermidnight.
Even then, the applications suffered hours of poor performance as users logged on and tried to
catch up. Online bill payments scheduled for Monday and Tuesday did not get made until
Wednesday.$132millioninACHscheduledpayments wereheldup.Alsoheldup werehundreds
ofauto-loanandstudent-loanapplications.
The Apology
OnThursday,thedayaftersystemrecovery,thebankissuedanapologytoitscustomers:
“We are sorry for the difficulties that recently affected Chase.com, and we apologize for
not communicating better with you during this issue. Giving you 24-hour access to your
banking is of the utmost importance to us. This was not the level of service we know you
expect, and we will work hard to serve you better in the future and to communicate with
youbetterifasituationlikethisshouldariseagain.
Online Bill Payments scheduled for September 13, 14 or 15 were processed by
Wednesday night, September 15. It is not necessary to reschedule these payments. If
you scheduled a payment during those dates, but do not see it reflected in your payment
activitybySeptember16,pleasecontactus.
We will refund any late fees that you may have incurred as a result of our delay in
processingyourpayment.
Thank you for your patience and for the opportunity to work harder to serve you in the
future.”
Lessons Learned
This is not the first serious outage that JPMorgan Chase has had in its online banking services.
These services were reported to have been also inaccessible for fifteen hours early in the
previous month. The bank’s only explanation was that the services were down for scheduled
maintenance,thoughcustomerscomplainedthattheyhadnotbeennotified.
The September outage described above graphically illustrates the need for database backups. If
the bank had relied only on its redundant database to provide data protection, it would have lost
its entire authentication and user-profile database. Though the database could perhaps have
been recovered by requiring all customers to reregister, this procedure would have been very
painfultothebank’scustomers.
2
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Acknowledgements
Thankstooursubscriber,MooreEwing,forpointingustothis incident.Informationforthisarticle
wastakenfromthefollowingsources:
JPMorganChase’sonlinebankingsitecrashed,Computerworld;September14,2010.
SpeculationabouttheJPMorganChaseauthentication databaseoutage, DBMS2; September 16,
2010.
JPMorganChase’sonlinebankingoutagesparksquestions,USAToday;September16,2010.
DetailsoftheJPMorganChaseOracledatabaseoutage,DBMS2;September17,2010.
JPMorganChase'sITfailure:Anapologyandsomeinformedspeculation,ZDNet;September17,
2010.
AlittlemoreontheJPMorganChaseOracleoutage,DBMS2;September24,2010.
OracledatabasecrashesJPMorganChasewebsite,WordPress;undated.
OracledatabasedesignslowedChaseonlinebankingfix,Computerworld;September24,2010.
3
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com