Tandem Computers Unplugged: A People’s History
July2012
In her book, Tandem Computers Unplugged: A People’s History, author
Gaye I. Clemson paints a poignant picture of the history of Tandem
Computers, Inc. Having worked at Tandem for eight years from 1984 to
1992, moving there from Bell Canada’s Computer Communication Group,
GayeisprivytoagreatdealofTandem’shistoryandculture.
In 2009, with the closing of the Fremont Manufacturing Supply Chain
facility, one of the last of the historic Tandem sites, a note was posted on
the Tandem Alumni Yahoo! Group site calling for amock wake and inviting
memories. For over a week the response was overwhelming; and the
resulting recollections of dozens of ex-Tandem employees, Tandem
vendors, and Tandem customers form the backdrop for the book. The
memories of these people provide the human touch to the Tandem history
thattheauthorfollowsfromTandem’sinceptionin1975toitsacquisitionby
CompaqComputersin1997.
Tandem began with a concept. Out of HP and working for the venture firm Kleiner Perkins in the mid-
1970s, James E. Treybig (Jimmy to all) came to the realization that many organizations needed
computers that would never fail to process their online transactions. He thought that he could build such
systems.WithTom Perkinsencouragementand $50,000from Kleiner Perkins,Jimmy,33 years of ageat
thetime,hired two talented former HPpeople –MikeGreenfor softwareand MikeKatzmanfor hardware
–tohelphimdevelopabusinessplan.
They delivered a successful business plan in 1974 with the intended market being “the use of multi-
processor computers in online transaction-oriented applications.” Kleiner Perkins anteed up another
$1,000,000 to carry the team through 1975. Thus was born Tandem Computers, Inc. The founders were
Jimmy, Mike Green, Mike Katzman, and Jack Loustanou, who would provide the financial guidance for
thefirm.Jimmy,ofcourse,wasCEO.
Jimmy was a character. He was described in many magazine articles as a Texan with an “aw-shucks”
accent, his shirttail out, his sleeves rolled up, his tie unknotted, and generally looking slightly rumpled.
However, this disguised a man who was extremely bright and quick witted, a driven, aggressive,
extremelycompetentbusinessman.
From the start, Jimmy espoused a very people-centric management philosophy. His philosophy was
based on the HP way, which was still in play at the time. All people were good (though good people do
not always make good decisions). People, workers, management, and company are all the same. Every
person must understand the essence of the business, and every employee must benefit from the
company’s success. Always promote from within. It was this philosophy that led to unparalleled company
1
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

loyalty which was a Tandem strength in the early years as evidenced by the multitude of personal
memoriesincludedbytheauthorinthebook.
The earlyteam of the founders and ten additional keyemployees got to work onthe successful design of
the first Tandem system. It was designed on an HP 3000. To celebrate the first working prototype in
1975,everyonegatheredfor abeer busttocelebrate. Fridaybeer busts soon becameatradition in every
Tandem office in the world. These were occasions when people could get together with their peers and
managementtotalk about anything atall. Jimmywouldbeseen walking around with abeer ineachhand
availabletoanyonewhowantedtobuttonholehim.
The first system was sold in 1976 to Citibank. It was a two-processor T16 NonStop system with 64
kilobytes of memory, two refrigerator-sized 10 megabyte disks, and a 60 line-per-minute printer. Its cost?
$116,000.
Tandem grewrapidlyafterthat.Thenext year,1977,saw$7.7millioninsales withastaffof170.This led
toTandem’s firstpublic offering, whichraised$9million.TruetoJimmy’s philosophythat everyemployee
shouldshareinthesuccessofthecompany,allweregivena100-shareoptionregardlessoftheirposition
inthecompany.
In 1980, with $100 million in sales and over 1,600 employees, Tandem was the fastest growing company
in America. Datamation declared Tandem No. 1 in customer satisfaction. Tandem retained that position
forfouryears.
During this time, employees flourished. Each was entitled to a six-week sabbatical every four years.
Additional stock options were handed out. A large outdoor swimming pool was built with Tandem’s name
onthebottom.
The Tandem Television Network brought entertainment and Tandem news to all employees. It was the
first network of its kind other than CBS, NBS, and ABC. The dissemination of company information was
further enhanced by the introduction of the NonStop News publication in 1978 and the Center – a
quarterlyjournal,in1981.
Tandem was one of the first companies to provide email to all its employees. The email system was a
worldwide network of 140 nodes and 600 processors. Though Jimmy felt that this significantly improved
communication throughout the company, he refused to read his on email on a terminal. His assistant
printedouthismessagesforhim.
Employee perks extended to recognition for top performers. The First Cabin Club honored outstanding
salespeople,andtheTandemOutstandingPerformers(TOP)recognizedoutstandingnon-salespeople.
As Tandem matured, so did its marketing philosophy. It moved from a technological focus to a solution
focus. The Alliance program was established to support third-party solution providers. The Customer
Conference Center (CCC) was set up to educate visiting organizations. The Tandem Executive Institute
briefedindustry-focusedexecutivesonTandem’scapabilities.
Jimmy’s encouragement for everyone to be himself or herself continued. A story told by one of the
responders told of visiting a couple of supervisors’ offices. One was Guido D’Ambrosio, whose office was
called“TheSwamp:”
“The swamp is more like a two-bit museum than on office. There were women’s underwear and
stuffed bras arranged on the wall, weird little statues all around and strange little signs with colorful
sayings (some of questionable taste). Technical manuals were strewn about, empty beer cans, full
ashtrays, half-dead plants, an old parking meter, a fish tank/terrarium that was completely green and
countlessotherbitsofjunk.”
2
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Hewentonfurthertosay:
“I remember Bill Hanson’s old-fashioned barber’s chair in the middle of his officewhere he’d read the
paperonbreaks.”
Jimmy included himself in this group. He always ran the Los Angeles marathon and prided himself on
finishingitinlessthantwohours.Hisrecordwasonehourand190minutes.
Oneof theresponders told of atalk thatJimmygavetoadinner groupin Belgium.Jimmyshoweduplate
partwaythrough dinner soaking wet from the pouring rain. He looked like a drowned rat. Around his neck
was a bolo-like string tie with a small creature-like figurine on the bottom. Halfway through the talk, the
“creature” started crawling up his belly, making an odd squealing noise. When it reached the knot in his
tie, he pulled it down. After a few minutes, it started back up again. After several repetitions of this, he
commented about the dangers of letting a Texas boy loose in Belgium – you never know what he’ll pick
up.
As a tribute to the loyalty and attitude of Tandem staff, the author has many stories of heroic efforts by
Tandem personnel to solve customer problems. Staff would travel around the world and spend sleepless
nightstocorrectaproblemthatwasaffectingacustomer.
Disappointedly, in 1982, Tandem stumbled. Its revenues and earnings faltered, and its stock dropped.
Jimmyhadtocutbackonstaff–aheartbreakingdecisiononhispartashehadbeenfollowingano-layoff
policy. However, Tandem recovered and in 1984 made the Fortune 500 list with $450 million in revenues
andastaffofover5,100employees.
Business continued to boom. In 1987, Tandem was listed on the New York Stock Exchange and finally
made the billion dollar revenue mark.Word was out that Jimmy could now hire somebody to sleep in his
clothes.
The day of October 17, 1989, was a day to remember. That morning, Tandem put on a worldwide show
announcing its newest computer, the Cyclone. That afternoon, at 5 PM, the Loma Preita 6.9 earthquake
hit, wreaking havoc from Oakland down through Silicon Valley. Tandem opened up itsWatsonville facility
asanemergencyreliefcenter.
A later earthquake triggered one of the most intriguing stories about Tandem’s NonStop systems. After
the earthquake, customer support received a call from a customer saying that his system was down and
asked how he could get it up. The support system asked if the customer knew how to reboot it. “Of
course,” said the customer, who went on to explain that the system was still running. The problem was
that it fell over in the earthquake, and the customer wanted to know how to get it up without hurting the
cabinet.
In 1990, Tandem hit its peak revenue point of $1.9 billion. But this was the start of a slow decline. It
seems that the market focus was moving from fault tolerance to faster and cheaper. This was
compounded byreducing employee morale. In the mid-1980s due to its growth and size, Tandem started
hiringprofessionalmanagersfrom theoutside. Somuchfor promotingwithin.Withthenewmanagement,
theemployee-centricphilosophyofJimmy’searlydayswassoonforgotten.
1991 saw the first round of significant layoffs and plant closures. The stock price had dropped so that
manyoptionswereworthless.1993broughtanother1,800layoffsanda5%cutincompensation.
In 1995, Jimmy was moved out of direct operations to become the Chairman of the Board. Roel Pieper
was appointed CEO. In 1996, Enrico Pesatori was hired as COO. The writing was on the wall. Tandem
was being groomed for an acquisition. Realizing this, Jimmy left the firm and returned to Texas to join a
Texasventurefirm.
3
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

In 1997, Tandem was sold to Compaq Computers. One of the first things that Compaq did was to
decimatetheTandemsalesforce.Ofcourse,becausetheysoldcomputersviatheInternet.
In May of 2002, HP acquired Compaq; and Tandem became the NonStop Enterprise Division of HP,
headedbyPaulineNist.Tandem hadnowgonefullcirclefrom its HProots toanHPdivision.Its staffhad
fallenfrom1,500employeesascomparedto9,500atitspeak.
TheloyaltyoftheearlyTandemstaffwaseloquentlyexpressedbyBobCron:
“Tandem,probablynevertobeequaledagaininthislifetime,representedcareforitsemployees,high
aspirations, untiring energies and best corporate philosophies and practices that were, if not always
perfect, at least diligently and thoughtfully pursued and applied. I personally interpret my allegiances
to Tandem and her people in much the same way that I am bound to my U.S. Marine Corps and my
buddiestherein:SemperFidelis,whichtranslatesto‘AlwaysFaithful!’”
The author has spiced up her book with hundreds of photos of Tandem people and early computers as
well as documents that include marketing brochures, advertisements, and the original Mackie diagram
that illustrated simply how Tandem achieved its fault tolerance. That diagram was on the back of every
employee’s badge. There is even a photo of Jimmy showing that he could write a note with his foot -
“Love,Y’all.”
If you are a Tandem person from the early era, you will probably find references and quotes related to
many of the people you knew. I for one enjoyed reading about those I knew – Dave Mackie, Dennis
McEvoy, Bob Marshall, Pauline Nist, Bill Heil, Ron LaPedis, Phil Ly, Henry Norman, Vic Para, Phyllis
(Witherspoon) Marriner, Jerrianne Churchill, Polly Kam, Gary Bonhiver, Jim Gray, Jerry Held, Randy
Baker,HaroldSammer,NigelBaker,MartinFennel(whomarriedPattiHuhnoftheCCC),JackChapman,
andNeilMcGowan.
Tandem Computers Unplugged is a must-read for any Tandemite. It can be obtained at
www.tandemcomputersunplugged.comorfromAmazon.com.
4
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com