inked a ten-year, $502 million deal with IBM back in March 2011 to massively upgrade the
supercomputers at the National Centers for Environmental Prediction (NCEP) facilities in Reston,
Virginia, and Orlando, Florida. In the wake of Hurricane Sandy in 2012, the investment increased,
not just to build yet another larger pair of supercomputers but to keep the pace of upgrades steady
and predictable. The Weather and Climate Operational Supercomputing System, or WCOSS, was
last upgraded two years ago with a pair of Cray XC40 machines. Just like clockwork, it is getting
upgraded in early 2018 with a substantial performance boost that will improve the length and
accuracy of forecasts here in the States.
https://t.co/YYqNfCcQj4
Is Solar-Powered Bitcoin Mining the Future?
Even though the price of Bitcoin has been booming, going all the way from about $1,000 back in
January to $19,000 at one point in December, there’s a couple of big roadblocks. One of these is the
massive amount of power it takes to actually mine the coins. Everyone who is looking to mine is
trying to figure out how to keep their electricity expenses low. Some operations have set up shop in
countries like Iceland to take advantage of geothermal power. Nations like Belarus have also
become attractive because of the relatively low cost of power compared to other places. However,
solar power has actually become one of the most talked about ways for miners to run their
operations, especially since Bitcoin and solar actually have a pretty long relationship together.
https://t.co/izSlRYXKxr
6
© 2018 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Overstock Payments Glitch Mixes Up Bitcoin and Bitcoin Cash
Online retail giant Overstock.com reportedly experienced a cryptocurrency payments bug that could
have allowed customers to mint money simply via repeated cancellation of orders. In January, North
Carolina-based bank security firm Bancsec informed journalist Brian Krebs that Overstock.com had
erroneously accepted bitcoin cash instead of bitcoin as payment for a product. To confirm the issue,
Krebs ordered a $78 motion sensor light on Overstock and opted to make payment by bitcoin.
"Logging into Coinbase, I took the bitcoin address, pasted that into the 'pay to:' field, and then told
Coinbase to send 0.00475574 in bitcoin cash instead of bitcoin," Krebs writes on his website.
Because of the glitch, the security specialist was able to make a $78 purchase by sending
approximately $12-worth of bitcoin cash.
https://t.co/gpYrHvsVFn
Russia moves toward creation of an independent Internet
Freedom on the Internet has diminished over the years in Russia: people go to jail for posts on
social media, there's a ban on VPN services, and expanded data storage is hard to come by.
And recent moves by the Russian government indicate that further developments are yet to come.
http://bit.ly/2Bb3IO3
Tallawarra power plant goes offline
Wollongong’s Tallawarra Power Station failed last week – for the second time in the past month.
The Australia Institute (AI), a Canberra-based think tank, reported the gas-fired power station – on
the shore of Lake Illawarra at Yallah – suddenly dropped to zero output on Friday afternoon. The
Energy Australia plant had been generating 394 megawatts (MW) when the outage occurred for
about two hours and 20 minutes. It didn’t return to the earlier output figure for another two hours.
https://t.co/bK1EQ0lB6C
SSM Health data breach compromised 29,000 patients after unlawful intrusion by
employee
SSM Health has revealed a data breach that compromised the protected health information of
29,000 patients. The system said they learned of the breach on October 30, 2017, after discovering
recently that a former employee inappropriately accessed medical records while working in the
customer service call center.
https://t.co/DgQZQ0B7qG
How network verification differs from monitoring, and what it’s good for
Network verification is quite different from monitoring in powerful ways. Monitoring observes low-
level events; verification understands the high-level goal. Monitoring watches what happened;
verification predicts what could happen. Monitoring samples a few packets; verification explores all
possible behaviors.
https://t.co/mRDsmSgfzl
Survey finds IT disaster recovery practices still rely on old technologies
7
© 2018 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

A joint survey of more than 5,600 information technology professionals across the globe found that
few organizations are tapping into new technologies to improve IT resilience. Despite the availability
of a variety of new cloud-based backup and disaster recovery services, most organizations are still
using on-premises equipment and managing backup with their own staffs. Migrations are similarly
coordinated internally, with the result being that a significant minority of respondents have
experienced a failed migration project within the past year.
https://t.co/ASCJjMIlmO
MTR East Rail disruption caused by failure of both primary and backup servers
The MTR Corporation announced that the serious service disruption on the East Rail Line (Hong
Kong) on January 11th was caused by the failure of both the primary and backup servers of the
signaling system. MTR staff said that at 9:00am, the signal system encountered a server problem;
and the situation did not improve after switching to a backup system. “We had to restart the server
manually, but it was not successful. Since the operation needed some time, for safety, the control
centre suspended the whole East Rail line around 9:25 am.”
https://t.co/7DHE1VJ2XO
SCADA security: Bad app design could give hackers access to industrial control
systems
Mobile applications used to help control Internet-connected SCADA (industrial control and
supervisory control and data acquisition) systems are riddled with security vulnerabilities that, if
exploited, could be used by attackers to disrupt or damage critical infrastructure.
https://t.co/PBB5DnH3Mr
What IT pros need to know about the Meltdown exploit
Meltdown is an exploit that takes advantage of how modern Intel CPUs execute instructions out-
of-order in an attempt to be more efficient and performant. Exploiting this vulnerability gives the
attacker access to most if not all of the privileged data stored in memory. This exploit operates
at the hardware level and therefore applies to all operating systems, including Windows, Linux,
and macOS. It also enables a guest virtual machine to break into hypervisor memory and
containers to break into host memory. As such, this exploit affects not only desktop and server
operating systems but also resources hosted in the cloud.
https://t.co/VCip7DlqME
How Does the Ability to Shoot Down Rockets Bring Widespread Value to The Utility
Industry?
A company that cut its teeth developing Israel's Iron Dome air defense system is now bringing its
collective tools and skills sets to help the utility industry manage its complex and growing challenges.
https://t.co/ZsjXSILvfI
Hawaii false alarm shows just how close the line is between mishap and nuclear war
In 1983, a Korean airliner bound from Anchorage to Seoul, South Korea, strayed into Soviet
airspace. Air defence officers, mistaking it for a U.S. spy plane that had been loitering nearby, tried
to establish contact. They fired warning shots. When no response came, they shot it down, killing all
269 people on board. But the graver lesson may be what happened next. Though it was quickly
8
© 2018 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

evident that the downing had been a mistake, mutual distrust and the logic of nuclear deterrence —
more so than the deaths themselves — set Washington and Moscow heading toward a conflict
neither wanted. The story illustrated how imperfect information, aggressive defense postures and
minutes-long response times brought both sides hurtling toward possible nuclear war — a set of
dynamics that can feel disconcertingly familiar today.
https://t.co/EnqVluJsH2
From the Availability Digest: "Swapping Replication Engines with Zero Downtime"
Sometimes, companies may decide to change data replication engines or to upgrade to a new
version of the existing data replication engine. With mission-critical applications, it is necessary to do
so without taking the applications down – a zero downtime migration (ZDM). Furthermore, it is
imperative that a backup copy of the database is always available, ready to take over if the
production database fails. The backup database must be kept synchronized with the production
database while the data replication engine is being migrated. In this article, we describe how a data
replication engine can be changed without taking down either applications or the backup database.
https://t.co/HCoWiwoGmO
At J.F.K. Airport, the Planes Just Wouldn’t Stop Coming
The harsh winter storm had passed. In its aftermath, parts of the airport were overloaded, jammed
with planes that had been kept on the ground during the storm. But screens showed bright yellow
airplane icons — incoming flights — approaching, with many more on the way. One by one they
landed. Unused runways became parking lots, with planes waiting for gates. And still they kept
coming. Hours and hours passed. It was the failure to stop them, experts said, that turned a chaotic
but manageable winter-storm episode into an airport delay for the ages.
https://t.co/2yYJ8pK2Sj
New Florida City to Produce Its Own Power, Have Self-Driving Buses
A new city of the future, now being built in the U.S. state of Florida, will rely 100 percent
on solar energy. It’s the first totally ecological, self-sustaining city in the U.S. and has an integrated
smart network that helps residents monitor and control the amount of electricity they consume.
https://t.co/92BDW8AfFD
Civil Works Accident Brings Down Two Manchester Data Centers
A civil contractor accidentally drove a spike through a power main in Manchester, England, on 12
December, cutting off power supply to two of the three buildings on the data center campus operated
by UKFast, the British service provider. The facilities’ backup power system failed to do what it was
designed to do, and the data centers went dark.
https://t.co/UutokVZYVw
Data centre resilience: mitigate against the cost of downtime
The resilience of a data centre – the ability to remain operational even when there has been a power
outage, hardware failure or other unforeseen disruption – is becoming increasingly critical for today’s
data centre manager. Combined with spiraling energy costs, legislative requirements and stringent
environmental policies, the proliferation of big data and rise of the data centre make it increasingly
important to mitigate against the cost of downtime. Whether associated with productivity losses,
9
© 2018 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

revenue losses or longer-term customer attrition, the cost of recovering a system or the longer-term
impact of reputational damage, the total cost of downtime can be crippling.
https://t.co/QIyo8jfx87
"The End of Custom Software?"
Back in the 1970s and 1980s, my company The Sombers Group specialized in writing custom
software packages for our customers. Today, software-implemented packages are available to meet
almost any computing need. But back then, there was a paucity of such products. The need for
software solutions to corporate challenges kept busy about a dozen of our staff. We served a half-
dozen customers at any one time. However, It is my belief and that of others that the days of start-to
finish custom software are substantially behind us.
https://t.co/Vg3mSZGKZQ
Forever 21 Breach: Hackers Accessed Credit Card Information Throughout Most Of 2017
Sealing a year plagued by cybersecurity incidents, Forever 21 confirmed in late December that
hackers stole credit card information from its stores throughout most of 2017. The company said that
hackers were able to gather personal information, like card number, expiration date, internal
verification code and sometimes the cardholder’s name. The retailer said its encryption technology,
which has been used since 2015 on some point-of-sale (POS) devices at some stores, was not
always on. At the same time, malware was installed on some POS devices.
https://t.co/ilD0HvYCjg
Intel was aware of chip vulnerability when its CEO sold off $24 million in company stock
Intel CEO Brian Krzanich sold off USD $24 million worth of stock and options in the company in late
November. The stock sale came after Google had informed Intel of a significant vulnerability in its
chips — a flaw that became public only in January. Intel says the stock sale was unrelated to the
vulnerability and came as part of a planned divestiture program. But Krzanich put that stock-sale
plan in place in October — several months after Intel was informed of the vulnerability.
https://t.co/Coj4N1ljwr
BBC News - Intel, ARM and AMD chip scare: What you need to know
Nearly all computers worldwide - and many other devices - have been exposed to security flaws that
leave them vulnerable to attacks by hackers. Researchers discovered gaps in security stemming
from central processing units - better known as the chip or microchip - which could allow privately
stored data in computers and networks to be hacked. So far, no data breaches have been reported.
Yet the question remains. Is it a big deal, and what does it mean for you?
https://t.co/OMogwQ3OLc
Meet the microgrid, the technology poised to transform electricity
A microgrid is any combination of power sources, power users, wires to connect them, and some
sort of control system to operate it all. Microgrid just means a small, freestanding grid. It can consist
of several buildings, one small building (sometimes called a “nanogrid”), or even one person (a
“picogrid”) with a backpack solar panel, an iPhone, and some headphones.
https://t.co/D5uwmh1CAg
10
© 2018 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Major flaw in millions of Intel chips revealed
A serious flaw in the design of Intel's chips will require Microsoft, Linux and Apple to update
operating systems for computers around the world. It is believed to affect chips in millions of
computers from the last decade.
https://t.co/UpEEB290Vk
Serverless: The future of cloud computing?
The cloud has been a boon for many companies, enabling CIOs to turn off servers or even shutter
data centers. CIOs rent processing power, storage and other tools from a mix of vendors in a quickly
growing market. But a small contingent of IT leaders is looking to a more efficient way to rent
computing horsepower. Rather than take on the often onerous obligations of designing and
managing cloud architecture, they are going “serverless.”
https://t.co/UQ7wqpg4f2
Australian towns going off the grid
As prices rose to new highs last year, and as the ever-constant threat of blackouts hung over the
east coast, many Australians looked for energy alternatives. While many are taking steps at the
individual level, others are looking to take full advantage of the push for more renewable energy and
shift away from centralised power systems on a larger scale. This is seeing the rise of microgrids, a
unique solution to a very Australian problem.
https://t.co/l5MU5r2jma
Blockchain and Data Storage: The Future is Decentralized
As it is with any emerging technology that suddenly gains fame and begins to be applied across real-
world use cases, issues have emerged around the underlying characteristics of blockchain – many
of which should be a primary focus of the coming year. Chief among these concerns is scalability.
That being said, the existence of these issues serves as a marker of just how far blockchain has
come. Tech leaders now posit that it could underpin the next phase of the internet, creating the
decentralized world wide web. As we look ahead to this new, decentralized internet, it is important to
consider one of its most important elements: decentralized storage.
https://t.co/XpagbiX946
Technology glitch delays O'Hare travelers at Customs
Travelers at O’Hare International Airport were among thousands delayed at their destinations
nationwide due to a technology glitch with U.S. Customs and Border Protection applications in early
January. Several major airports experienced a “temporary outage with its processing systems” for
about two hours.
https://t.co/7tXzh6JFgU
11
© 2018 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

