Calculating Availability – Heterogeneous Systems Part 3
June2008
InParts 1and2of this series,1wereviewedsomeelementaryconcepts of probabilitytheory
and applied them to the analysis of the availability of active/active systems and
active/standby systems. We considered not only user downtime due to dual-system failures
but also user downtime due to failover times and failover faults. We extended these results
toincludethecaseinwhichthenodesinthesystemhavedifferentavailabilities.
Here in Part 3, we show how to calculate the availability of a complex system comprising
parallel and serial-node configurations. This is a step-wise analysis in which parallel
subsystems and serial subsystems are iteratively reduced to single nodes until only one –
thesystemnode–remains.
Butfirst,letusbrieflyreviewwhereweleftoff.
A Review of Parts 1 and 2
StateProbabilities
When considering system availability, it is convenient to think of asystem being in one of several
states.For instance,thesystem maybe up, it maybe down, or itmaybe failingover toa backup
system. More to the point, we are not specifically interested in system availability; we are
interested in user availability. We take this view because not all failures affect all users. For
instance, in an n-node active/active system, should a node fail, only 1/n of the users on the
averageneedtobefailedovertosurvivingnodes.
Wearetherefore interested in theprobabilitythat asystem will be in anyoneparticular state(the
states are mutually exclusive as the system can only be in one state at a time). System states
can be defined by three Boolean functions – AND, OR, and NOT. For instance, a two-node
system is upif Node1OR Node 2OR both are up. Alternatively,thesystem is upif Node 1 AND
Node2areNOTdown.
Lettingp(x)=theprobabilitythatthestatexistrue,then
 TheANDoperatorimpliesmultiplication.TheprobabilitythatxANDyaretrueisp(x)p(y).
 TheORoperatorimpliesaddition.TheprobabilitythatxORyistrueisp(x)+p(y).2
 TheNOToperatorimpliesthecomplement.TheprobabilitythatxisNOTtrueis1-p(x).
1CalculatingAvailability–HeterogeneousSystemsPart1,AvailabilityDigest;March2008.
CalculatingAvailability–HeterogeneousSystemsPart2,AvailabilityDigest;May2008.
2Thisistrueifxandyaremutuallyexclusive.Iftheyarenot,theprobabilitythatxORyistrueisp(x)+p(y)–p(x)p(y).
1
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Applyingtheserelationshipstothepreviousstatements,letabetheavailabilityofeithernodeina
two-node system. That is, a is the probability that a node is up. The probability that a node is
downistheprobabilitythatitisNOTup(thecomplementfunction):
probabilitythatnodeisup=a
probabilitythatnodeisdown=(1-a)
Considering only the case of a dual-node failure taking down the system, the probability that the
systemisupistheprobabilitythatNode1andNode2areupORtheprobabilitythatNode1isup
ANDNode2isdownORtheprobabilitythatNode1isdownANDNode2isup:
probabilitythatsystemisup=a2+a(1-a)+(1-a)a=a2+2a(1-a)
Likewise,thesystemisupifNode1ANDNode2areNOTdown:
probabilitythatsystemisup=1–(1-a)2
Thesetwoexpressionsareidenticalasalittlealgebrawillshow.
SystemAvailability
Weconsiderthatadual-nodesystemisdownunderthreeconditions:
a) Bothnodeshavefailed.
b) Onenodehasfailed,andtheusersarebeingfailedovertoabackupnode.
c) Onenodehasfailed,andthefailoverhasfailed(afailoverfault).
Let
mtbf bethemeantimebeforefailureforanode.
mtr bethemeantimetorepairanode.
a betheavailabilityofanode=mtbf/(mtbf+mtr).
mtfo bethemeantimeforafailednodetofailovertoabackupnode.
d probabilitythatafailoverwillfail(theprobabilityofafailoverfault).
A systemavailability(probabilitythatsystemisup).
F probabilitythatsystemisdown=1-A.
InPart2,weshowedthat
mtfo
F(1a)2 (1a) (1a)d (1a)
mtr
ThoughnotdoneinPart2,Equation(1a)canbeextendedtothecaseofann-nodesystemwiths
spares:
mtfo
Ff(1a)s1(1a) (1a)d (1b)
mtr
where
f=numberofwaysthats+1nodescanfailoutofnnodes.
Equation(1a)canbewrittenas
  mtfo 
F(1a) 1a d (1a)(1a') (2)
  mtr 
2
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

where
mtfo
a'a d (3)
mtr
Thisleads toanimportant observation.Thesystem actsasaheterogeneoussystem withthefirst
nodetofailhavinganavailabilityofaandthesurvivingnodehavingareducedavailabilityofa’:
Following the failure of one node, failover time and failover faults cause the system to
behaveasifitcomprisesaremainingnodewithdecreasedavailability.
HeterogeneousSystems
If the two nodes in an active/active system have different availabilities, say a for Node 1 and a
1 2
forNode2,thenEquation(1a)becomes
 a a mtfo  a a 
F(1a 1)(1a 2) 1 1 2   1 1 2  d (4)
2  mtr 2
Complex Systems
Systems can be more complex than the parallel systems considered in Part 2. There may be a
network of subsystems in a serial/parallel configuration. A parallel subsystem comprises a set of
nodes that act as backups to each other. It will continue to function even if one or more nodes
should fail (depending upon the level of sparing). For a dual-node, singly-spared parallel
subsystem in which the two nodes have availabilities of a1 and a2 respectively, the availability of
theparallelsubsystemistheprobabilitythatNode1ANDNode2willNOTbedown:
Availabilityofdual-node,singly-sparedparallelsubsystem=1–(1-a1)(1-a2) (5)
A serial subsystem requires that all nodes in the subsystem be operational in order for the
subsystem to be operational. Should any one node fail, the subsystem will fail. For instance, in a
two-node serial subsystem in which the nodes have availabilities of a1 and a2 respectively, the
availabilityoftheserialsubsystemistheprobabilitythatNode1ANDNode2willbeup
Availabilityofdual-node,serialsubsystem=a1xa2 (6)
Theavailabilityofacomplexsystem canbeanalyzedbyfirstcalculatingtheavailabilityofeachof
the parallel subsystems in the complex and by replacing each with a single node with the
equivalent availability. Then any series of subsystems are each replaced with a single node with
theequivalentavailability.Moreparallelsubsystemsmaybecreatedthatareresolvedfollowedby
more serial subsystems. This process continues until the system has been reduced to a single
nodewithitscalculatedavailability,whichisthesystemavailability.
For instance, consider the system of Figure 1a. It comprises six nodes with availabilities of a1
through a6. We start by noting that there are two parallel subsystems of two nodes each. The
availabilityofthea1/a2parallelsubsystemis
a7=1–(1-a1)(1-a2)
Theavailabilityofthea3/a4subsystemis
a8=1–(1-a3)(1-a4)
3
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

a6
a6
a1 a2 a1,a2
a7
a5
a5
a8
a3,a4
a3 a4
(b)
(a)
a6 a6
a6,a10 a11
a9,a5 a10
a7,a8
a9 a5 (e)
(d)
(c)
AComplex System
Figure 1
4
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

We replace these two parallel subsystems with single nodes with availabilities of a7 and a8, as
shown in Figure 1b. This now exposes a two-node serial subsystem with availabilities of a7 and
a8.Itsavailabilityis
a9=a7xa8
The serial subsystem is replaced with a single node with availability a9, as shown in Figure 1c.
Thisleadstoanothertwo-nodeparallelsubsystem withavailabilitiesofa5anda9.Theavailability
ofthisparallelsubsystemis
a10=1–(1-a5)(1-a9)
Replacing this parallel subsystem with a single node with availability a10 gives the configuration
shown in Figure 1d. This again is a two-node serial subsystem in which the nodes have
availabilitiesofa6anda10.Itsavailabilityis
a11=a6xa10
This has reduced the complex system to a single node, and a11 is the availability of the entire
systemofFigure1a.
This example has ignored one complexity, and that is failover. If in a parallel subsystem, there is
a failover time following the failure of a node, the failover downtime must be accounted for when
calculating the availability of the parallel subsystem. Availability in the presence of failover is the
subjectofEquations(1)through(4)above.
We will consider failover in a complex system in the example that we analyze in Part 4 of this
series. This example is that of an active/active system backed up bya remote standbysystem. It
is a particularly important configuration when active/active systems use synchronous replication
via network transactions and are therefore limited in the distance that may exist between the
active/active nodes due to application latency. For disaster tolerance, what is often provided is a
backupsystemagreatdistanceawayusingasynchronousreplication.
Summary
By breaking down a complex system into a series of parallel and serial subsystems, the
availability of the overall system can be easily determined. A parallel subsystem comprises a set
of nodes that can withstand the failure of one or more nodes. A serial subsystem will fail if any
nodeintheseriesfails.
The first step is to resolve the availability of parallel components in which one or more may fail
and yet the system is still operational. If there is a failover time required, the downtime during
failover and the probability of a failover fault must be considered. Each parallel subsystem is
replacedwithasinglenodewiththeavailabilityoftheparallelsubsystem.
Thismayresult inthepresenceof oneor moreserial subsystems.Eachof these is analyzedand
replaced with an equivalent single node. Once again, further parallel subsystems may result and
thenfurther serialsubsystems as theparallelsubsystems areresolved.This procedurecontinues
iterativelyuntilthesystemhasbeenreducedtoasinglenode.
In Part 4, we will apply this technique to analyze by example an active/active system backed up
byahotstandbysystem.
5
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
