processing, with other, less time-sensitive processes delegated to more remote cloud servers.
https://t.co/WEs0cGWe4u
Michigan County's Ransomware Recovery Plan Minimizes Impact of Network Attacks
Livingston County, Michigan (U.S. state), receives several thousand malware attacks per day; but its
recovery plan and backup allow it to continue operating without any significant impact. At the
beginning of 2016, the county began working with Unitrends, a technology solution provider for
backup and disaster recovery solutions. Unitrends delivered a hardened system for storing backups
within all components of the environment — backup hardware, software, replication and cloud
storage –— covered under a single support call to Unitrends.
https://t.co/PXXY4HgFkS
4
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Oklahoma utility uses drones for quicker detection of power outages
As Oklahoma enters the spring severe storm season, electric provider OG&E is gearing up to reduce the length
of power outages using drones. Utility providers across the nation are using drones to assess damage to the
power grid following extreme weather events. The drones can be used for visual inspections in rural areas
where power companies like OG&E used to spend countless hours driving roads.
https://t.co/qOkh8PFUBs
Cyber attack would leave East Coast dazed, Energy Dept. says
A cyber attack on the East Coast's energy system would result in widespread public confusion as
everything from electricity to gasoline supplies would be cut off for as much as several weeks, the
U.S. Energy Department said recently. The agency released a report outlining the results of a major
cyber-attack simulation called "Liberty Eclipse," conducted in December
https://t.co/0SudJorfAL
Data Center Cooling Outage Disrupts Azure Cloud in Japan
A long list of Microsoft Azure cloud services malfunctioned for hours in late April for a subset of
customers using services hosted in a Microsoft data center in Japan due to a cooling system outage
that was caused by a failed RUPS (rotary uninterruptible power supply).
https://t.co/UqG5mc4ejh
Data trashed? When RPO 0 isn't enough
World Backup Day came and went – did you notice? It seems the only thing we've learned is that
everyone wants Recovery Point Objectives (RPOs) of 0. Unfortunately, aggressive RPO targets are
hard. They affect the design of real world environments, and are sometimes not possible.
https://t.co/cNl51AbkkO
Regulator tells Singapore Exchange to improve outage recovery process
The Singapore Exchange has been told by the country's financial regulator to improve its recovery
processes following an investigation into an outage last year that shut down trading for an entire day.
SGX suffered the disruption last July, when a malfunction caused by duplicated trade confirmation
messages halted trading in blue chip stocks for several hours.
https://t.co/FX0tD3VB94
It was a tough week for Delta airlines and their customers
After years of profitability and reliable service, Delta Air Lines struggled mightily last week with two
basic functions of its business -- flying airplanes and accommodating passengers. Severe weather
that pounded Atlanta in the middle of spring break caused a five-day meltdown across Delta's flight
network, leaving passengers fuming and its own crews waiting for instructions. The weather is, of
course, out of Delta's control. But the chaos was amplified by the phenomenal complexity of running
a modern-day mega-airline.
https://t.co/FvtL9iaxbP
5
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Airline Tech Keeps Melting Down but Nobody Knows Why
In early April, a severe thunderstorm in Atlanta forced Delta to begin canceling flights out of its major
hub. But that storm quickly spiraled into a five-day fiasco that resulted in 4,000 canceled flights and
plenty of angry customers. The culprit? A failure of technology. So why are airlines’ computer
systems consistently crashing, and why couldn’t Delta’s keep track of its crews during a crisis?
In the case of Delta’s recent incident, the issue was that its crew management system was
overwhelmed – not that its computers crashed outright.
https://t.co/y52kd49hRD
How The New York Times Handled Unprecedented Election-Night Traffic Spike
When he woke up the morning of October 21, 2016, Nick Rockwell did the same thing he had done
first thing every morning since The New York Times hired him as CTO. He opened The Times’ app
on his phone. Nothing loaded. The app was down along with BBC, CNN, Fox News, The Guardian,
and a long list of other web services, taken out by the largest DDoS attack in history of the Internet.
An army of infected IP cameras, DVRs, modems, and other connected devices – the Mirai botnet –
had flooded servers of the DNS registrar Dyn in 17 data centers, halting a huge number of sites and
mobile apps that depended on it for letting their users’ computers know how to find them online.
https://t.co/ZOSr7l0xwa
Microgrids: Energy independence (and money saved) for companies
Microgrids and their related renewable energy can help businesses shave energy costs and bolster
the aging infrastructure.
https://t.co/1SlVQBGi62
How Good Archiving Prevents Dark Ages
More data has been created in the last two years than in the entirety of human history, but it could all
be lost in an instant. Earlier this year, when Amazon’s servers blacked out for about four hours,
sites from streaming giants like Netflix and Spotify down to the average Internet Joes temporarily lost
their livelihoods in the cloud. USA Today reported that “Amazon wasn’t able to update its own
service health dashboard for the first two hours of the outage because the dashboard itself was
hosted on AWS.” Modern archiving has turned out to be a natural enemy of copyright law, and an
increasing reliance on electronic data storage could leave our recent history in a delicate position.
https://t.co/1omiDOa7pL
Hacker causes every Dallas tornado siren to go off at once for 95 minutes in the middle
of the night
On Friday night, 7 April, 18 minutes before midnight, every single one of Dallas's 156 emergency
weather sirens went off. They blared for an hour and a half, to the annoyance, terror or amusement
of 1.3 million residents. By 1:20 a.m., flummoxed officials had decided the only way to stop the noise
was "to unplug the radio systems and the repeaters and pretty much turn the siren system
completely off."
http://bit.ly/2r24jxn
6
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Can Solar Events Disrupt Your Water Supply?
In 1859, a solar storm known as the Carrington Event created powerful flares and induced one of the
largest geomagnetic storms on Earth. Such was the intensity and brilliance of the associated white
light flares, people in the northeastern U.S. could read newsprint by the lights of the aurora. In 2003,
a massive solar storm caused a system failure in the Swedish electrical grid by shutting down
transformers. The same event caused damage to the grid in North America, which included a
capacitor trip and a transformer overheating. This event resulted in a shutdown of water and sewage
pumps in New York City, and millions of gallons of sewage spewed out in New York City. In South
Africa, the same event led to a breakdown in 12 transformers.
https://t.co/rrFmzadYks
British Airways website outage delays check-in for passengers
A British Airways outage subjected passengers to long delays in online check-in on 11 April,
preventing access to most features on the site. The outage started around midday and lasted until
7pm. Passengers were unable to book, check-in online, and access customer accounts.
https://t.co/4Cxa38bYeC
Tales in Tech History: The Floppy Disk
Some people may remember that the floppy disk was the ubiquitous data storage and exchange
media, which allowed users to easily transfer their data from one computer to another. Indeed, in the
days before email attachments and USB sticks, there was simply no other way to move data around,
unless of course the computer happened to be plugged into a network (but remember, most
computing environments before the 1990s tended to be non-networked).
https://t.co/dRCbBy1gwn
Microsoft Word zero-day used to push dangerous Dridex malware on millions
Booby-trapped documents exploiting a critical zero-day vulnerability in Microsoft Word have been
sent to millions of people around the world in a blitz aimed at installing Dridex, currently one of the
most dangerous bank fraud threats on the Internet.
https://t.co/jCYMyjvmSH
How Amazon Prevents Data Center Outages Like Delta’s $150M Meltdown
It’s typical for hyper-scale data center operators like Amazon to build their own infrastructure
technology when it isn’t available on the market or when they feel they can make it cheaper on their
own. One piece of technology Amazon built in-house is meant to circumvent what one of the
company’s top infrastructure engineers described as misplaced priorities in the way electrical
switchgear vendors design their products. It is this problem that likely caused last summer’s Delta
data center outage that ultimately cost the airline $150 million.
https://t.co/m4MUJBBtWJ
7
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Aging U.S. Infrastructure Hampers Private Sector
The American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) recently released its report card on the United
States’ aging infrastructure. LIke any school report card, the “D+” mark given would get any
underperforming student sent to the principal’s office. There is plenty of factual data to support the
view that our nation’s critical infrastructure is failing.
https://t.co/kyBlyi89rl
8
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

