National Australia Bank’s Customers Down for Days
December2010
In late November of 2010, a “corrupted” file brought down the bulk of services provided by the
National Australia Bank. Two weeks later, the bank was still working to recover some customer
accounts. Though the bank has declined to describe what went wrong, there is ample evidence
thatitwas,inpart,ahumanerror.
The National Australia Bank
Founded in 1893 as the National Bank of Australasia, the bank became the National Australia
Bank (NAB) in 1981followingits merger withtheCommercialBankingCompanyof Sydney.NAB
(www.nab.com.au) is now one of the largest banks in Australia. It is ranked the 17th largest bank
in the world based on market capitalization. Headquartered in Melbourne, Victoria, Australia, the
bank operates 1,800 branches and 3,000 ATMs serving 11 million customers in ten countries,
includingAustralia,NewZealand,theU.S.,theU.K.,andAsia.
In addition to its retail, corporate, and other banking services, NAB clears payments for many
otherbanksinAustralia,includingtheCommonwealthBank,Westpac,ANZ,HSBC,Citibank,and
Bank of Queensland. For instance, NAB processes direct entryand over-the-counter deposits for
Citibank. It processes interbank transfers, payroll payments, direct debits, check payments, and
depositsforHSBC.
To perform this responsibility, NAB conducts nightly batch runs on behalf of its partner banks. A
transaction history file showing all payment activity for each bank is generated and sent to that
bankbytheendofday.
The Data-Processing Breakdown
Early on the morning of Wednesday, November 24th, NAB’s partner banks went on high alert
whentheydidnotreceivetheirtransactionfiles.Withoutthesefiles,thebankscouldnotreconcile
theircustomeraccounts.
This was rated a Severity 1 problem, which is an industry standard indicating that the fault had
highcustomerimpact.
The Impact
ManymajorbanksinAustraliawereimpactedbytheproblem.Theyhadnorecordoftheprevious
day’stransactionsthataffectedtheircustomeraccounts.
1
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Payroll deposits could not be made. Credit-card payments were frozen. Direct debits for bill
paying went into limbo. Interbank payments ceased. The NAB ATMs were down, as were its
onlinebankingservices.Retailerpoint-of-saleterminalsmanagedbyNABwereuseless.
Millions of NAB’s customers and an untold number of other customers were affected. Customer
accounts were frozen and inaccessible. Customers faced the prospect of a weekend without
accesstotheirmoney.
Ifaworker’semployerbankedwithNAB,hisemployees’salariescouldnotbedepositedintotheir
accounts, no matter which bank theyused. Theycould not paytheir rents or buy food. Automatic
bill payments ceased, and customers faced late fees or even disconnection from services
becausefundswerenotavailableforregularpayments.
Even more critical was that the Centrelink welfare payments could not be made to the neediest
familiesinthecountry.
This problem didnotlastfor hours.Itlastedfor days. Bythe weekend,NABreportedthatmostof
its customer accounts had been reconciled but that almost 20,000 accounts still had instances of
duplicate and multiple transaction entries. Thousands more customers still did not have an
accurate record of their transactions. Moreover, a week later, NAB announced that it still did not
have all of its problems resolved. Problems carried over to the next weekend, almost two weeks
aftertheincident.
The NAB Response
NAB opened up its branches during the first weekend to help out its customers. It provided free
overdraftprivileges sothat customers could get somemoney. Itsaid that it would compensate its
customers for any fees that they incurred from other banks, such as late fees or interest that
resultedfromtheincident.
Other banks cooperated. They agreed to waive fees that resulted from the NAB fault. They also
offered temporaryoverdrafts with no fees or interest to their customers who were affected bythe
NAB outage. Payment dates for loans were relaxed, and no penalty fees were imposed for
overduemortgagepaymentsoroverdrawnaccounts.
NABpaidthousandsofdollarstoplaceafull-pageapologyfrom CEOCameronClyneinallmajor
newspapers.Inpart,theapologyread:
“Onbehalf of everyoneat NAB,Iwouldliketooffer our sincerestapologies andthanks toour
customersfor your ongoing patienceandunderstandingas we work hardtofix thedelays we
have experienced in processing some payments and transactions. I know that the delays
havecausedinconvenienceandinsomecasesdistresstomanypeople.”
Finally, on Sunday, November 28th, NAB announced that other banks were now in a position to
process anysalarydeposits or other payments that might have been impacted by the processing
delay.However,individualaccountproblemslingeredforanotherweek.
The Probable Cause
NAB has yet to explain exactly what happened. Its only official comment, released by NAB’s
official spokesperson, George Wright, was that the problem was not a human error. It was a
“corruptedfile”thatcausedtheproblem.
However, the publication The Australian indicated that it had information to the contrary. It
reported that someone from NAB’s IT department inadvertently uploaded an erroneous file that
2
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

“corrupted” the system.The conjecture is that the file contained the instructions for managing the
batch-processing cycle. It inadvertently caused many transactions to be duplicated. Mr. Wright
describedthisconjectureasa“fairstatement.”
Furthermore, NAB did not comment on why its management processes had failed to detect the
errorortorectifytheproblembeforeitgotoutofhand.
Lessons Learned
While little information is forthcoming on exactly what caused the problem, one lesson seems to
be painfully clear. Why could the bank not roll back the erroneous changes made by the faulty
batch run, correct the problem, and rerun the batch job. Did they not take backups? True, the
reprocessing would probably have violated the batch window; but that would have been much
betterthanexperiencing,ineffect,atwo-weekoutage.
NAB has hired KPMG to conduct an investigation into its problems. In the meantime, more than
6,000 NAB customers have lodged compensation claims for refunds of bank fees, interest, and
latepaymentcharges.
Aninterestingasideis that thebank rejectedin2008a recommendationtospend $100millionon
backupprocedures.Inhindsight,thatmighthavebeenmoneywellspent.
Acknowledgements
We thank our subscriber, Paul Holenstein, for bringing this incident to our attention. The material
inthisarticlewastakenfromthefollowingsources:
MillionsaffectedbyNationalAustraliaBanktechnicalglitch,news.com.au;November27,2010.
Computer Problem of National Australia Bank Causes Financial Meltdown, Batangas Today;
November28,2010.
Computerproblemfixednow–NAB,PerthNow;November28,2010.
Computerproblemfixednow,NABsays,TechWorld;November29,2010.
NewscamtoaddtoNAB’swoes,AdelaideNow;November29,2010.
CorruptedfilecrashesNABpayments,ITNews;November29,2010.
National Australia Bank’s Problems Mainly Fixed Though Some Customer Issues Linger, IEEE
Spectrum;November30,2010.
HumanerrortriggeredNABsoftwarecorruption,TheAustralian;November30,2010.
CBAglitchwipesoutaccountbalances,TheAustralian;December14,2010.
3
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com