The outage, which began mid-March and has also affected telephone and cable television
service, has Liberty Harbor residents questioning why they are forced to use a single internet
provider, Gold Coast Broadband, that is tied to Liberty Harbor developer Peter Mocco.
https://t.co/GYgy6rbrkY
Availability Digest Oldie but Goodie: "Availability versus Performance"
Increased availability usually does not come for free. There are hardware approaches that increase
cost, and there are software techniques that reduce performance. Because of the tremendous
improvements in system performance over the years as compared to the modest improvements in
system availability, it often is desirable to trade off some of these performance gains for improved
availability. This is especially true for applications that are involved in the 24x7 operations of today’s
enterprises. The techniques for availability improvement at the expense of performance are
substantially software-based. They improve the availability of a single system. However, improved
single system availability translates to much higher availability for multinode systems.
https://t.co/AzPO4QlfVY
Microsoft finally fixes 'critical' Windows security flaw after patch delay
The software giant made customers wait a month before rolling out a fix for a serious Windows
security flaw with public exploit code. Patch Tuesday, 14 March, saw the fix of a Windows SMB bug.
The memory corruption bug could allow a remote, unauthenticated attacker to crash an affected
machine.
https://t.co/gH3ywmXSNJ
5
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

This startup lets you collect and trade solar power, bypassing the grid
A new startup in Brooklyn, New York (USA) is bringing solar panels to rooftops while letting local
residents buy and sell electricity among their neighbors. The project, named Brooklyn Microgrid,
aims to create a peer-to-peer trading system built on blockchain, the distributed ledger
technology behind Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies. Although it boasts just 50 participants so far,
the Brooklyn experiment offers the chance to bypass electricity companies and create a viable
generation and storage network that functions independently even during broad power failures.
https://t.co/xWOJx55irq
Huge database leak reveals 1.37 billion email addresses and exposes illegal spam
operation
A faulty backup inadvertently exposed the entire working database of notorious spam operator River
City Media (RCM). In all, the database contains more than 1.37 billion email addresses. For some
records, there are additional details such as names, real-world addresses, and IP addresses. It's a
situation that's described as "a tangible threat to online privacy and security."
https://t.co/Pus71ag38s
Federal Agencies Hacked 31,000 Times in 2016
U.S. federal agencies faced almost 31,000 “cyber incidents” in fiscal 2016, incidents that led to
“compromise of information or system functionality,” the U.S. Office of Management and Budget
stated in its annual cyber security report to Congress. “Sixteen of these incidents met the threshold
for a major incident, a designation that triggers a series of mandatory steps for agencies, including
reporting certain information to Congress,” the report stated.
https://t.co/XlyCdNMdod
Gas Turbine Microgrids: What’s Next as They Become Smarter?
Gas turbine microgrids are growing in sophistication as microgrid controllers become more
advanced. Control technology tends to accomplish such functions as islanding and frequency
control. More advanced controls offer the ability to automatically leverage energy prices. They can
calculate best pricing among on-site resources at any given moment or between the grid and the
microgrid. The bottom line is that an advanced microgrid is ultimately a technology tailored to solve a
customer problem. As a result, microgrids are rarely developed in a plug-and-play fashion. Instead,
they often require a great deal of pre-installation study by an experienced and knowledgeable
energy company.
https://t.co/Nu3TpcGVuk
6
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Microsoft says Google’s cloud reliability claim vs. Azure and Amazon Web Services does
not compute
With March’s Amazon Web Services outage still fresh in the minds of many people, Google senior
vice president Diane Greene took a few moments at the Google Cloud Next conference to address
the issue of reliability. “I just learned yesterday that we were recognized as having the highest
availability of any cloud over the course of 2016,” Greene said on stage. She paused before adding
with a chuckle, “I think 2017 will be promising, too.” Greene was referring to new numbers
from CloudHarmony, a unit of the Gartner research firm. CloudHarmony revealed that Google Cloud
had 74 minutes of “total time lost” in 2016, compared with 270 minutes for Microsoft Azure and 108
for Amazon Web Services. Microsoft responded by declaring that comparing downtime alone
doesn’t take into account the larger number of regions operated by Azure, which Microsoft says
provides a more accurate picture of cloud reliability.
https://t.co/VO9ZASnZHX
Sneaky adware exploits Android users with precision targeting
Malware using new precision-targeted tactics to distribute adware hid on the Google Play store for
two months and infected over 10,000 Android users before being removed. Called 'Skinner', the
malware will display unwanted ads to users; but it does so in a way that avoids raising suspicion.
Skinner is far from the first instance of malware to be discovered on the Google Play store - but this
one uses sophisticated new tactics.
https://t.co/w2PEWEk0Y8
How to Survive a Cloud Meltdown
One of the biggest questions following Amazon’s cloud outage in March was whether you can use
the world’s biggest cloud provider and still avoid downtime when the provider has a major outage – a
common if infrequent occurrence. If you can, how to do it? And if there is a way to do it, why isn’t
everybody doing it?
https://t.co/X59MErQbbk
Microsoft outage leaves users without access to services for hours
Microsoft experienced an issue with its authentication platform across some services in early March.
Users faced problems signing in or creating accounts on Xbox Live, Skype, Outlook, Hotmail, and
more for a couple of hours. Microsoft’s outage follows last week’s AWS blackout that left a
substantial part of the Internet without media to display. Both situations lasted only a couple of hours
and had no significant consequences, but some speculate there might be something more behind
these issues.
https://t.co/HXgPN7SK67
7
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Recent Amazon outage highlights need for cloud automation
In early March, Amazon faced one of its largest service outages since the launch of Amazon Web
Services (AWS). The list of disrupted businesses read like a dire Who's Who of the Internet, from
Netflix to Pinterest to Airbnb. The cause of the AWS S3 outage appears to be a fat-finger typo by an
authorized Amazon system administrator who was troubleshooting an unrelated problem. According
to research from Ponemon Institute, at least 22 percent of data center outages each year are caused
by human error. The fact that Amazon has not experienced many more outages like this so far is a
testament to just how good their processes truly are. Apparently, though, the public cloud is not
going to save us from human error.
https://t.co/P8imWiW8FU
FCC Investigating AT&T's Massive 911 Outage
Federal regulators are investigating the source of an outage that left millions of AT&T wireless
customers in 14 states and the District of Columbia without access to 911 emergency services for
several hours on 8 March. It took five hours to resolve.
https://t.co/pTkPuZsZsu
We can't see inside Fukushima Daiichi because all our robots keep dying
Tepco, the utility company tasked with overseeing cleanup and waste processing for the
former Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant, recently hit another snag. Reactor #2 is far more radioactive
inside than previously measured, and the contamination exceeds the tolerance levels of the robotic
probes that Tepco sends into the reactor to find the estimated 600 tons of fuel and debris that fill the
reactor’s concrete lining.
https://t.co/Q6fNBHnHn9
Security check bug sparks luggage mayhem at Israel's main airport
A technical fault with Ben Gurion Airport's automatic screening system led to delays and massive
lines in early March, disrupting baggage distribution at Israel's international airport.
https://t.co/lMhvs8AX9E
The Internet was meant to resist nuclear strikes. Now it can’t handle a power outage
When a cloud-storage malfunction at Amazon temporarily knocked out services, including Netflix,
Slack, the Securities and Exchange Commission’s website, “smart” thermostats and email servers, it
demonstrated how much we’ve all come to depend on one company’s infrastructure. It also shows
how the centralization of data has made the Internet — at least the part that most of us use — more
vulnerable than it was designed to be.
https://t.co/Nk1n0VXrlu
8
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

AWS blames a typo for Tuesday’s outage
Amazon Web Services announced that its 28 February outage that affected major websites and
apps was caused by human error. Sites including Netflix, Reddit and the Associated Press struggled
for hours -- all because of a simple typo. "While we are proud of our long track record of availability
with Amazon S3, we know how critical this service is to our customers, their applications and end
users, and their businesses," the company wrote in an online message. "We will do everything we
can to learn from this event and use it to improve our availability even further."
https://t.co/nnUvvwYTg8
Amazon and the $150 Million Typo
On Tuesday, 28 February, a typo caused part of Amazon Web Services to fail. In an online
statement, Amazon described the circumstances of the disruptive typo this way: "The Amazon
Simple Storage Service (S3) team was debugging an issue causing the S3 billing system to
progress more slowly than expected. At 9:37AM PST, an authorized S3 team member using an
established playbook executed a command which was intended to remove a small number of
servers for one of the S3 subsystems that is used by the S3 billing process. "Unfortunately, one of
the inputs to the command was entered incorrectly and a larger set of servers was removed than
intended."
https://t.co/8eIER7uC6q
Torvalds unhappy with sloppy Unix Millennium Bug patches for Linux kernel
Along similar lines to the Y2K bug, there is a new challenge faced by Unix-like operating systems -
the year 2038 problem or 'Unix Millennium Bug'. Under these operating systems, date values are
stored in a signed 32-bit integer indicating the number of seconds since January 1, 1970. A problem
arises with the 32-bit integer overflowing at approximately 0314 hours on January 19, 2038, causing
systems to interpret the date value as December 13, 1901. Unsurprisingly, Linus Torvalds himself is
keeping a very close eye on Linux kernel code changes.
https://t.co/Rfp1YcNer1
Massive Amazon cloud service outage disrupts sites
It didn't quite break the Internet, but a 4-hour outage on 28 February at Amazon's AWS cloud
computing division caused headaches for hundreds of thousands of websites across the United
States.
https://t.co/LzvstKq5Wu
9
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

