Repair Strategies
October2014
Mission-critical applications are typically protected by providing one or more
backup systems to take over processing should the production system fail. The
application is considered down if its services are unavailable to its users. We
consider in this article one of the factors that determines application downtime – the repair
capabilitiesoftheorganization.1
A Production System with a Backup
Letusfirstconsideraproductionsystemwithasinglebackupsystem,thenormalcase.Thereare
threeprimaryreasonswhytheapplicationmaybedown:
 The production system has failed and is in the process of failing over to the backup
system.
 The production system has failed, followed by a later failure of the backup system. Both
systems are now down and are awaiting the repair of at least one of the systems so that
theapplicationcanberestarted.
 The production system has failed, and the failover to the backup system has failed. Now,
both systems are down and are awaiting the repair of at least one of the systems so that
theapplicationcanberestarted.
In the latter two cases, the recovery time for the application is dependent upon how long it takes
to repair one system. This time, of course, depends upon the repair resources that can be
broughtto bear.If there is onlyonerepair team,itwill be workingonthefailedproductionsystem
whenthebackupsystem fails.Therepairofthebackupsystem willhavetoawaittherepairofthe
productionsystem.Wecallthisserialrepair.
However, in many cases, there may be two repair teams. This is especially true if the production
and backup systems are located at different sites. In this case, the repair of the backup system
will begin immediately following its failure. There is some chance that the backup system will be
repaired before the production system and result in a shorter downtime than what would have
occurredwithserialrepair.Wecallthisparallelrepair.
Let us let the parameter a represent the availability of a single system (a node in the total
redundant system). a is the percent of time that the node is up – that is, it is the probability that
1ThisanalysisisanextensionofananalysisinapreviousDigestarticle,butwithamoreaccurateapproach:
CalculatingAvailability–RepairStrategies,AvailabilityDigest;November2006.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/private/0102/calculating_availability_repair_strategies.pdf
1
©2006SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

thenodewillbeup.Therefore,theprobabilitythatanodewillbedownis(1-a),andtheprobability
thatthesystemwillbedownistheprobabilitythatbothnodeswillbedown.
SequentialRepair
For sequential repair, there is only one repair team. There are two ways that the two nodes can
fail.One wayisthattheproductionnodefails,followedlaterbythebackupnode.Therepairteam
will be working on the production node at the time of the failure of the backup node. The other
way is for the backup node to fail first, followed by the production node. The repair team will be
workingonthebackupnodeatthetimeofthedualfailure.
In either case, the probability of system failure, F, is the probability that both systems are down,
or(1-a)2.Sincetherearetwowaysinwhichbothnodeswillbedown,then
F=2(1-a)2 Probabilityofsystemfailurewithsequentialrepair (1)
ParallelRepair
With parallel repair, the repair of the second downed system will begin immediately upon its
failure.Therepairofbothsystemswilloccursimultaneously.
This brings us to an interesting observation about the probability distribution that we use
throughout availabilityanalysis.We assume that events such as failures and repairs are random.
That is, within a certain time interval, the probability that an event will happen is fixed and is not
affected byany history. The probability of any event happening during that time interval does not
changewhetherasimilareventhasjusthappenedorhasnothappenedforalongtime.
Thus, if the average (mean) repair time for a system is mtr (mean time to repair), then when the
firstsystemfails,itsaveragerepairtimewillbemtr.However,whenthesecondsystemfails,ifthe
firstsystem is stilldown, its expectedrepair timefrom that point in time willstillbe mtr,as will the
repairtimeofthesecondsystem.
Thus, in the interval mtr following the failure of the second system, on the average there will be
two repairs, one for each system. Since repairs are random, the average time to repair the first
system will be half the average repair time, or mtr/2. Consequently, the system downtime is
reducedbyhalfrelativetothatwithsequentialrepair:
F=2(1-a)2/2=(1-a)2 Probabilityofsystemfailurewithparallelrepair (2)
Multinode System with One Spare
Wenowconsiderasystemwithnnodesandonespare.Thismeansthatthesystem willcontinue
tofunctionwith(n-1)nodesoperational.Itisdowniftwonodeshavefailed.
Inthis case, thereare n(n-1) ways for two nodes tofail(note thatthis is equalto 2for two nodes,
as noted in the previous section). First, one of n nodes must fail, then one of the remaining (n-1)
nodesmustfail.Thus,forserialrepair,
F=n(n-1)(1-a)2 Probabilityofsystemfailurewithsequentialrepair (3)
Asarguedabove,withparallelrepair,theprobabilityofsystemfailureiscutinhalf:
n(n1)
F (1a)2 Probabilityofsystemfailurewithparallelrepair (4)
2
2
©2006SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

3
©2006SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Multinode System with Multiple Spares
If there are n nodes with s spares, then (s+1) nodes must fail in order for the system to fail. The
next question is how many ways are there for s+1 nodes to fail? This is the number of failure
modes, f, for the network and is the number of ways that s+1 nodes out of n nodes can fail. The
numberofsuchcombinationsof(s+1)nodesoutofnnodesfailingisgivenbytheexpression
n!
f  (5)
(ns1)!
Thesymbol“!”means“factorial.”Forinstance,3! is3x2x1=6.0! Isaspecialcaseandisequalto
1.
Notethatforn=2ands=1,f=2aswouldbeexpected(seeEquation(1).
Thus,inthiscase,
F=f(1-a)s+1 Probabilityofsystemfailurewithsequentialrepair (6)
If fullrepair is available, thenfollowingthefailure of (s+1) nodes, there will be (s+1) repairs in the
time mtr following the failure of the node that took the system down. The system repair time will
bereducedfrommtrtomtr/(s+1),and
f
F (1a)s1 Probabilityofsystemfailurewithparallelrepair (7)
s1
Failure Modes
In general, in an n-node system with s spares, not every combination may cause the system to
fail. In this case, the number of failure modes, f, may be less than the maximum given by
Equation (5). It is important to analyze the distribution of critical processes and hardware across
thenodestodeterminetheactualvalueoff.
In any event, the value of f for a dual node system with a single spare (the common case) will
alwaysbe2.
Repair Teams
In the general case, if there n nodes, each node may be in a different data center, and in that
case there will be multiple repair teams to provide parallel repair. However, often there are
multiple nodes in multiple data centers, with one repair team in each data center. In this case,
there may be fewer than (s+1) repair teams. If there are r repair teams that can be effectively
used,thenEquation(7)becomes
f
F (1a)s1 Probabilityofsystemfailurewithparallelrepair (8)
r
where
F=probabilityofsystemfailure
a=availabilityofanode
s=numberofspares
f=numberoffailuremodes
r=numberofrepairteams
4
©2006SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

In some cases, a single repair team might be able to provide parallel repair. For instance, the
repair team might include a hardware expert, a network expert, a database expert, an operating
system expert,and an applicationexpert.It is likelythatmultiplefailures mightbe due to different
factors. For instance, one system has a hardware failure and another has an application fault. In
thiscase,therepairteamcanprovideparallelrepair.
There are some cases in which the calculation of the effective number of repair teams may be
more complex. For instance, consider the case of a system with four nodes split evenly across
twodatacenters.Iftwosystemsinonedatacenterfail,thereiseffectivelyonlyonerepairteam.If
one system fails in each data center, there are effectively two repair teams. It is important to
analyzetherepair capabilities of adistributedsystem tocomeupwithanaccuratevaluefor r,the
effectivenumberofrepairteams.
Summary
The repair strategy used by an enterprise can have a significant effect on application downtime.
Especiallyinthecaseofa production/backuppair,itis importanttohavetworepairteamssothat
the recovery of a dual-node failure can be executed in parallel. This simple technique will cut
applicationdowntimeinhalf.
5
©2006SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
