Controlling Amtrak Trains in the Northeast Corridor
November2016
In the early 1990s, mycompany, The Sombers Group, Inc., was awarded a USD one
million dollar contract by Amtrak to develop a system to control its trains along the
Northeast Corridor from Washington, D.C. to Boston. The contract came about
because of problems that Amtrak was having with its Tandem computer-based control systems. The
systems had been installed a couple of years earlier by another company, but they never functioned
properly.
The systems involved two Tandem computers – one in Penn Station, Philadelphia, to control train traffic
from Washington, D.C. to Hartford, Connecticut, and one in Boston for trains traveling from Harford to
Boston. We had been doing other work for Amtrak and were asked if we could get the Boston system
working.
I sent Paul Siegel, one of mytop technicians, to Boston to take a look. Surprisingly, Paul had the system
workingproperlywithinamonth.HebecamealocalheroatAmtrak.
With that success, Amtrak asked us to straighten out its main system in Philadelphia. Amtrak estimated
that it would require just a few software changes and gave us a fixed price contract based on their
estimate. However, when we got into the system, we realized that it would pretty much have to be
rewritten.Bythetimewe werefinisheda yearlater,Amtrak hadpouredover amilliondollars intothenew
system.
The Tandem Train Control System
TheTandem traincontrolsystem was drivenbyadatabasethatcontainedthe Amtrak trackmodelfor the
entire Northeast Corridor. The track model contained every track segment, switch, and signal light that
existedinthisarea.
The track model was kept up-to-date by signals from the field. Trains were located via track occupancy
detectors.Thesewerenothingmorethanrelaysthatwerethrownwhenatrainshort-circuitedthetworails
of track. Signal lights indicated their current state to the Tandem (stop, go, caution), and switches
indicatedtheircurrentposition.
The Tandem system could control the position of switches and the state of signal lights to move trains
alongtheirintendedpaths.
Trains were controlled by Amtrak schedules. When a new train was due to leave its originating station,
train controllers (dispatchers) using touch-screen Unix terminals connected to the Tandem system
determined the best route for the train to take. The system then controlled switches and signal lights to
allow the train to follow that path. It there was a conflict along the route, the Tandem system would stop
thetrainviasignallightsuntiltheconflictwasresolved.
1
©2016SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

The Role of Middleware
NetWeave middleware was used extensively in the control system to connect the Tandem system with
other systems. NetWeave provided several middleware services including Remote Procedure Calls, data
replication,andstore-and-forwardmessaging.
With RPCs, two computers established a communication link between themselves, letting one computer
trigger a procedure or application on the other computer. RPCs were used to order computers along the
tracktothrowswitchesintothecorrectpositionsandtocontrolthesignallights.
Data replication was used to keep the dispatcher terminals updated with the current track model. Train
dispatchers used touch-screen Unix terminals connected to the Tandem system to monitor and control
traffic. The track model for the portion of the track a dispatcher was managing was displayed on his
terminal.Whenever there was a change in the track model (a train moved, a switch was thrown, a signal
light was changed),the newtrack model was replicatedtothedispatcher’s terminal.Thus,healways had
anup-to-dateviewofhisportionofthetrackmodel.
When a train was about to enter a dispatcher’s assigned track area (either a new train or a train from
another area), his workstation would suggest routes for the train to take.When the dispatcher selected a
route, the routing data was forwarded to the central Tandem database, from where it was replicated to
otherdispatchers’workstations.
A train dispatcher managed his track section by entering commands via his terminal to throw switches
and to change signal lights. These commands were sent to the Tandem system, which would then issue
RPCs for the requested actions. The changes in switch positions or signal light states were returned to
theTandem system,which updated its track model. Thetrack modelchanges werethen replicated to the
dispatcherterminals.Thisgavethedispatcherpositivefeedbackthathiscommandhadbeenexecuted.
Amtrak coordinated with other railroads via store-and-forward messaging. If a train were to enter the
Amtrak system from another railroad, or if an Amtrak train were to transit to another railroad, the two
railroadscoordinatedthemoveviastore-and-forwardmessaging.
Availability
The Amtrak specifications called for a system availability of 0.9998, including the Tandem system, the
dispatcher Unix workstations, and the network connecting the Tandem to the field devices. Our first
calculationsshowedanavailabilityof0.9995,whichAmtrakwouldnotaccept.
2
©2016SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

The problem was in the Tandem system. It was an eight-CPU system, and the assumption was that it
would survive any single CPU failure but that a second CPU failure would bring it down. There were 28
waystwoCPUscanfailinaneight-CPUsystem.
The solution was to reduce the number of failure modes.We reorganized the software processes so that
there wereonlytwelvewaysapair ofCPU failures wouldtakedownthesystem.Thisbroughtus wellinto
theavailabilityspecification,andthesystemwasacceptedbyAmtrak.
The Backup System
There was no backup system for the Tandem train control systems. Rather, if the system failed, the train
dispatchers would move to the basement where a hard-wired track model was located on a large board.
Lights on the board indicated where trains were. The status of signals and switches was also shown on
the board. The train dispatchers could control trains by throwing switches and changing signal states via
controlsontheboard.
A Surprise Ending
After several years of service, for reasons unknown to the author, Amtrak decided to replace its Tandem
systemswithnetworksofPCs.SofarasIwasconcerned,thisakintoafarmerreplacinghistractor witha
thousandchickens.
The project was a management nightmare. There were dozens of PCs involved, and theyall had to work
together flawlessly. It took almost two years to get the PC network to function properly. But it finally did,
andtheTandemsystemswereretired.Sob!
3
©2016SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com