Major Bank Uses Active/Active to Avoid Hurricanes
October2007
Headquartered in the Midwest, a major U.S. bank serves much of the eastern United States
plus Michigan, Ohio, Kentucky, Indiana, Illinois, and West Virginia. It engages in five main
businesses:
 branchbanking
 consumerlending
 commercialbanking
 investmentadvising
 processingsolutions
The bank’s roots go back well over a century. It first opened in 1863 and then grew by
acquisitionsandmergerstobecomeamajorforcetodayinthebankingindustry.
Card Authorization Services
As part of the bank’s processing solutions business, it provides credit and debit card
processing for its merchant customers. The bank feels that these services must be highly
reliable and available. The services must survive any system failure, no matter the cause,
with rapid failover time. This is because should these services fail, users would be denied
theuseoftheircreditordebitcardsforthedurationoftheoutage.
Therefore, the bank decided to go with highly reliable HP NonStop servers in a two-node
active/active configuration to provide these services. One node is located in St. Petersburg,
Florida, and the other is located in Grand Rapids, Michigan. This geographical separation
ensures that nosingle environmentaldisaster,manmadedisaster, or system failure will take
downbothnodes.
Though each node normally handles only one-half of the total processing load, both nodes
are configured to handle the entire load so that full transaction processing can continue
unimpededintheeventofanodefailure.
Active/Active with Customer Partitioning
In the bank’s active/active configuration, both nodes are always active so long as they are
properlyfunctioningandthenetwork connectingthemisoperational.Bothareprovidingthesame
setofdebitandcreditcardtransactionservicestotheirmerchantcustomers.
In active/active systems, data collisions can occur if two users at two different nodes attempt to
update the same row or record at substantially the same time (within the replication latency
1
Thisdocumentmaynotbedistributedinanywaybyelectronicmeans.
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

period).Topreventdatacollisions,thebank splits its merchants betweenthetwo nodes.Roughly
half of themerchants are assigned to the Florida node and half to the Michigan node. Each node
has its own set of IP addresses, and each merchant is assigned the IP address of its primary
node to use for transaction processing. However, the network is also configured so that each
merchantcanswitch its IP address tothealternatenode.Inthis way,thatnodecanbe usedas a
backupintheeventthatthemerchant’sprimarynodefails.
As transaction processing occurs, database changes at each node are replicated to the other
node viathe Shadowbase asynchronous bidirectional replicationengine(www.gravic.com).Thus,
eachnodecontainstheentiredatabasefortheapplicationnetwork.
merchants merchants
assigned assigned
toFlorida toMichigan
IPA IPB
partitioned
application
Shadowbase
bidirectionalreplication
Florida Michigan
normaloperation
Since Shadowbase replicates on a transaction basis, the results of each transaction are
committed at the backup database by Shadowbase as soon as that transaction commits on the
sourcedatabase.Thiskeepsthenodaldatabasesintransactionsynchronization.
Because the work of eachcustomermerchant is being done on onlyone node, no data collisions
can occur as a result of the asynchronous data replication. That is, in no case will one node be
making a change to a row that is also being changed by the other node during the replication
latencyinterval.
Failover
Should a node experience a failure, the merchants which were assigned to that node as their
primary node simply switch their network routing IP address to that of the alternate node.
Processing for the failed-over merchants continues on their backup node, uninterrupted from the
last completed transactions. Processing continues as usual for those merchants who are
primariedonthatnode.
The bank uses the ease of node failover to its advantage to avoid potential disasters. For
instance, whenever Florida is threatened by a hurricane, the bank will instruct all of its customer
merchants assigned to the Florida node to switch over to the Michigan node until the hurricane
threathaspassed.
In2005, during a particularlyintense hurricaneseason,the bank did this five times.As a result,it
avoided any potential system downtime due to the devastating hurricanes Dennis, Katrina, Rita,
2
Thisdocumentmaynotbedistributedinanywaybyelectronicmeans.
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

and Wilma, each of which pounded Florida with sustained winds of over 130 miles per hour and
whichcausedacombinedtotalofover$120billionindamage.
merchants merchants
assigned assigned
toFlorida toMichigan
IPA IPB
partitioned
application
Shadowbase
bidirectionalreplication
Florida
Michigan
failoveroperation
Summary
This banking system demonstrates in practice how active/active systems can provide
extraordinaryavailabilities,eveninthefaceoffrequentnaturaldisasters.
Furthermore, it proves the ease of switching users to an alternate (backup) node in a very short
periodoftime.Thisisaveryimportantaspectofactive/activesystemssinceitcanbeusedtotest
failover procedures in a risk-free manner with no impact on the users. Failover testing is one of
the most important practices that ensures high availability; yet because of the interruptive and
risky nature of failover testing, it is often avoided. Active/active architectures, with their ease of
failover, solve this dilemma. Not only is failover fast, but it is reliable since it is known that the
other node is up and running. After all, the other node is currently actively processing
transactions.
By the same token, the system can be easily load-balanced by simply directing one or more
merchantcustomerstoswitchovertotheiralternatesystem.
Thebank’simplementationofactive/activeillustratesseveraladvantagesofthisarchitecture:
 Failoverisfast.Nodeoutagesaretransparenttotheusers.
 Failovertestingissimpleandreliable,withnoimpactontheusers.
 The system can be easily load-balanced by moving users from one node to another,
againwithnoimpactontheusers.
The bank has avoided data collisions by partitioning its users. The only downside of this
implementation is the potential loss of transactions still in the replication pipeline should a node
fail (a common problem with backup systems of any kind when asynchronous data replication is
used).1 However, no transactions are lost as a result of controlled failovers performed for
preventivemeasures,failovertesting,orload-balancing.
1SeeourNovember,2006,article,AsynchronousReplicationEngines,andourDecember,2006,article,Synchronous
Replication.
3
Thisdocumentmaynotbedistributedinanywaybyelectronicmeans.
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

It is for these reasons that active/active systems are being used more and more for credit and
debit card authorization services, as described in our previous case studies Bank-Verlag – The
Active/ActivePioneerandBankServGoesActive/Active.
4
Thisdocumentmaynotbedistributedinanywaybyelectronicmeans.
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
