– Our October Twitter Feed of Outages
October 2017
A challenge every issue for the Availability Digest is to determine which of the many
availability topics out there win coveted status as Digest articles. We always regret not
focusing our attention on the topics we bypass. With our new Twitter presence, we don’t
have to feel guilty. This article highlights some of the tweets that made headlines in
recent days.
Abandoned mobile apps, domain names raise information security risks
Whether it's an unfortunately short shelf life or a discontinued need, mobile apps are often abandoned by
creators, who sometimes move on to a bigger, better deal. Should the domain be abandoned by its
creator, a lot of domain-specific data is left out in the wild. The apps still can contact custom domain
names for arbitrary tasks like configuration changes, application updates or publishing information. The
traffic from a mobile device that is still trying to connect to an old and expired domain exposes lots of
personal information — contact data, text messages, pictures, GPS data and call logs, all sitting at risk of
an attack.
https://t.co/TY6dBvjjGG
Is your app ready for Black Friday?
With the increasing use of mobile devices for online shopping, a major share of every wallet is now
going to online retailers. The convenience of shopping anytime; anywhere perfectly suits the busy,
on-the-go generation that is giving eCommerce businesses a big boost. Despite this reality, more
than 70% of SMBs do not have their websites ready for a sudden rise in traffic and fail to tackle a
huge volume of shoppers during seasonal peaks and following promotional campaigns.
https://t.co/lJacmeWeYU
Why did Hurricane Irma leave so many in the dark?
The National Hurricane Center issued its final advisory for Irma on September 11th; but for millions of
people left in the storm’s wake, the disaster remained far from over. One stark reminder? Power
outages. Everywhere. Across the Caribbean, through the entirety of Florida, up into Georgia, and
spreading into the Carolinas, Irma ripped power from the people. Seventeen million people, at its
peak. Following herculean round-the-clock efforts of the largest assembly of restoration workers in
history, the lights flickered back on. But questions about these outages—how many, why, for how
long, and critically, could it have gone better—abound.
https://t.co/ArAQ6reWl1
1
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Equifax Data Breach: Unpatched Apache Struts Vulnerability Was Exploited in Hack
Credit reporting firm Equifax announced Thursday that the hackers who breached its servers
exploited an Apache Struts security vulnerability, which led to the exposure of personal information
belonging to more than 143 million consumers in the United States. While Equifax reported the
breach occurred sometime around mid-May, the bug in the Apache Struts framework was fixed in
March, more than two months before the apparent exploit on Equifax servers took place.
https://t.co/88mAs9HWHa
Close the Data Center, Skip the TIC – How One Agency Bought Big into Cloud
It’s no longer a question of whether the U.S. federal government is going to fully embrace cloud
computing. It’s how fast. With the current administration pushing for cloud services as part of its
broader cybersecurity strategy and budgets getting squeezed by the administration and Congress,
chief information officers (CIOs) are coming around to the idea that the faster they can modernize
their systems, the faster they’ll be able to meet security requirements. And that once in the cloud,
market dynamics will help them drive down costs.
https://t.co/S1TfhxZlhz
How Aussie partners can help keep critical information safe in healthcare
In housing some of the world’s most sensitive data, the healthcare industry plays host to vast
amounts of critical information. Yet in Australia a gap remains, as customers fail to recognize the
importance of back-ups and the capability to perform them. There are thousands of small to medium
healthcare centers across the country; and despite a paper legacy, all now collect patient data
electronically. Doctors, specialists and clinics need back-ups but do not have the tools or expertise
to perform them to industry best practice.
https://t.co/qVbmYT2y8m
Why do airlines struggle with tech, and how can they fix it?
Is the airline industry really that far behind other industries when it comes to IT? Absolutely, say
industry analysts. The reasons are many, but a key one that has led to systemic problems is simply
that IT has not received enough attention, according to airline and travel industry analyst Henry
Harteveldt. "Until recently, airline CIOs never had the respect they deserve from their CEOs," he
said, "because CEOs hadn’t been interested in IT. CIOs might be part of the executive leadership
but often are not part of inner most circles [at airlines]."
https://t.co/OrRt9MulD4
Harvey highlights issues of aging 911 tech
As flood waters began swallowing roads and homes during Tropical Storm Harvey, panicked
Houston, Texas residents did what everyone in the U.S. is programed to do in an emergency. They
dialed 911. But the emergency number struggled with record-high call volume. At the peak of the
storm, the service received around 80,000 calls in a 24-hour period. The Harris County area typically
gets around 8,000 calls a day. Some people were unable to get through at all, and those who did
were put on hold while a recording -- which promised the call was being processed – looped.
https://t.co/1cvVunBx3J
2
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Banks Around the World Switch to Blockchain Technology
Traditional banks officially caught the summer’s blockchain fever, in part propelled by the
cryptocurrency boom. Quartz reported some of the world’s largest banks, including Barclays, HSBC
and the Swiss banking giant UBS, recently started exploring ways to build a paywall with blockchain
technology, the same distributed ledger technology behind innovations like bitcoin. Then in
September, the US Federal Reserve indicated it might also update outdated infrastructures with new
systems using DLT and cryptocurrency-powered financial transactions.
https://t.co/S2GHFfSsqj
DataBank Plans Wireless Tower Data Center Services for Edge Computing
Another wireless-infrastructure heavyweight is getting into the new business of selling data center
space at the bases of cell towers to help companies shrink the distance data has to travel between
mobile devices and the networks of online video, voice, data, and cloud service providers.
https://t.co/ygzuQlT2Bg
Why tracking data centers is so hard
The U.S. Office of Management and Budget recently reported that the government has closed about
1,900 data centers since the launch of the Federal Data Center Consolidation Initiative in 2010,
saving almost $1 billion. It also lists the remaining data center inventory at 9,000 and reiterates the
goal set out by the Data Center Optimization Initiative to cut that number in half and save an
additional $2.7 billion by the end of fiscal year 2018. These latest figures speak to a problem that
has plagued the federal government for years: its seeming inability to accurately catalog and track its
own data center inventory across all federal agencies.
https://t.co/z0ea9ZjlQe
Facebook's Denmark data center will supply heat to city
Facebook’s planned Danish data center will supply hot air to the district heating system of the
nearby city of Odense when it opens in 2020. When the site is built, Facebook’s waste heat will be
boosted by a heat pump and delivered as hot water into a heating system run by local Fjernvarme
Fyn. Odense is the third largest city in Denmark, with 175,00 citizens - and Facebook believes it will
supply up to 100,000 MWh of energy per year that could warm up to 6,900 homes.
https://t.co/8mc75YQPO4
Why don’t we know how much airflow IT equipment requires?
If you’ve ever tried to find how much airflow a new server requires, then you’ve experienced the
frustration of burning precious time to no avail. Finding server airflow requirements should be as
easy as finding its power requirements since they are just as important, yet IT equipment vendors
leave us guessing on how to properly specify cooling.
https://t.co/OivRrp79iP
3
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Florida Data Centers Brace to Serve Customers Weathering Irma
Cloud computing is often touted as a more secure way to manage data off-site and above the fray.
But information stored in and accessed via the cloud always comes down to earth because it is
maintained in data centers, including many in Florida right in the predicted path of Irma. Those
centers invoked disaster protocols to make sure clients were able to access important corporate
data regardless of what devastation the storm wreaked.
https://t.co/PlwTsuedRt
Bureau blames old hardware
Decades-old hardware and outdated management practices must be overhauled at the Australian
Bureau of Meteorology after extremely low temperature readings at two NSW sites were
misreported. A review into the bureau’s automatic weather stations has found there was equipment
failure at Goulburn and Thredbo, hardware was “not fit for purpose”, and there were “clearly failures”
in systems of bureaucracy put in place back in the 1990s.
https://t.co/gdASjj2772
Dark DR – Avoid Its Costs with Active/Active
Traditional disaster recovery (DR) methods utilize an active/passive architecture, one in which there
are two redundant servers. One server is actively processing the application, and the other acts as a
backup system ready to take over should the production system fail. The two systems typically are
located remotely from each other to avoid a dual failure due to some local disaster. From an
operations viewpoint, the backup server remains ‘dark’ until it is needed. As such, this architecture is
commonly called “Dark DR.”
https://t.co/a3FuRFacfa
Equifax data leak could involve 143 million consumers
Data leaks have become so commonplace that it’s incredibly easy to become numb to them, but
credit reporting service Equifax recently announced a doozy that when all is said and done could
involve 143 million consumers. This is bad. It was a treasure trove of information for the bad guys
out there and included Social Security numbers, birth dates, addresses and, in some instances,
driver’s license numbers. The information came mostly from US residents, but a percentage also
involved UK and Canadian citizens.
https://t.co/8TjXiEcVnZ
Hurricane Harvey creates new abnormal for the electric grid - One Step Off the Grid
Microgrids and distributed energy systems kept critical services up and running despite Hurricane
Harvey’s best efforts to do them in. Twenty-one convenience stores and gas stations in the Houston
area remained open thanks to an unusual microgrid system designed by Enchanted Rock (ERock).
The Texas-based company installs natural gas generators at commercial sites, which it aggregates
into virtual power plant microgrids. During normal operations, the virtual power plant provides
support services to the central grid. When an outage occurs, the generators island from the grid and
provide back-up power for their host sites.
https://t.co/AVPdEfidRY
4
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Instagram hack: API bug allowed hackers to access high-profile users' email addresses,
phone numbers
Instagram notified its verified users that hackers managed to gain access to the phone numbers and
email addresses of its "high-profile users" by exploiting a bug in its API (application programming
interface). The popular Facebook-owned social media platform said it believed that "one or more"
hackers got through a software glitch on Instagram's API and targeted high-profile stars to get their
personal contact details.
https://t.co/VblhXtS4H0
How Houston's Data Centers Weathered the Storm During Hurricane Harvey
Hurricane Harvey brought a whole new calculus to disaster risk, slamming the Texas Coast with 125
mile per hour winds and then stalling, drenching parts of the area with more than 50 inches of rain –
more than any storm event in American history. In the midst of calamity, the region’s data center
teams secured their facilities and kept their customers online, including services that were vital to the
region’s emergency response. There were no reports of any major Houston data centers
experiencing outages.
https://t.co/mgQPvHbyXy
State of Louisiana upgrades to software-defined data centres
The U.S. state of Louisiana is completely modernizing its technology infrastructure, transforming the
mismatched legacy network to an interoperable system of software-defined data centers and
service-oriented architecture. The project began in 2014 with the overhaul of state Medicare and
Medicaid systems. This led to a comprehensive review of the state’s technology infrastructure. In the
end, it became the Louisiana Enterprise Architecture (EA) project, dedicated to modernizing and
standardizing systems for all 16 state governmental agencies. When completed, the state hopes to
have a modern system that is scalable, cost-effective, standardized, and customer-oriented.
https://t.co/gfC6tD1Zom
Google made a tiny error and broke half the internet in Japan
When an ISP makes a tiny mistake, the outcome could have immense repercussions – and this is
precisely what happened in Japan. In late August, half the Internet in the country suddenly shut
down after Google accidentally botched a Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) around Noon local time.
The origin of the blunder was a number of falsely announced peer prefixes sent to Verizon.
http://bit.ly/2wbbeJg
Wasting millions on failed tech upgrades hurts Philadelphians
No matter the level of government, agencies must continuously analyze how to modernize their
technology systems. Citizens deserve to interact and receive services from their government in the
same manner that they perform daily tasks with ease and flexibility. Unfortunately, Philadelphia’s
government (Philadelphia, Pennsylvania USA) has fallen well below the technological curve. Millions
of dollars have been spent on several expensive systems that have not worked properly or were
never even launched. These technology fails are not an unfamiliar discovery, and they have cost
taxpayers more than $100 million since 2007.
https://t.co/y0G2FzNbR4
5
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Hackers Gain ‘Switch-Flipping’ Access to US Power Systems
In an era of hacker attacks on critical infrastructure, even a run-of-the-mill malware infection on an
electric utility’s network is enough to raise alarm bells. But the latest collection of power grid
penetrations went far deeper: Security firm Symantec is warning that a series of recent hacker
attacks not only compromised energy companies in the US and Europe but also resulted in the
intruders gaining hands-on access to power grid operations—enough control that they could have
