Triple Redundancy Failure on the Space Station
November2007
In June, 2007, a triply-redundant attitude and
environmental control computer provided by Russia
failed on the International Space Station (ISS). Had
this been a mission to Mars, it would have been fatal.
Only the space station’s proximity to Earth, which put
it in range of support and resupply missions,
preventedatragedy.
Though the problem was circumvented in a few days
bythespacestationcrew,ittook weeksforthestation
crewandgroundengineers todeterminethesourceof
the problem. It turned out to be caused by a single
point of failure in the otherwise triply-redundant
system –afailurethat was highlyunlikelybutonethat
NASAphotogallery
occurredanyway.
During this experience, many technological and diplomatic lessons were learned. Understanding
the interaction between the crew members was imperative since the U.S. and Russia are bound
tobepartnersinaMarsmission.
The Shuttle Mission
TheU.S.spaceshuttleAtlantisdockedwiththeISS
on June 10, 2007.1 Commanded by Colonel
Frederick Sturckow, it carried the second and third
starboard trusses required to extend the space
station as well as an additional pair of solar arrays
to provide additional power for the station. It also
carried U.S. astronaut Clayton Anderson who
would stay on the ISS and replace SunitaWilliams,
whowouldreturntoEarth.
During the mission, the trusses were installed on
the space station along with the new solar arrays.
The solar arrays were unfurled and their power
addedtothespacestationpower.
Fromtheleft(frontrow)areastronautsRickSturckow,
Disaster Strikes commander,LeeArchambault,pilot,andPatrick
Forrester,missionspecialist.Fromtheleft(backrow)
areastronautsJohnOlivas,ClaytonAnderson,Jim
During Atlantis’ visit to the space station, and after Reilly,andStevenSwanson,allmissionspecialists.
Imagecredit:NASA
1NASAmissionreport,http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/sts117/main/index.html
1
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

the new trusses had been installed and the deployment of the new solar arrays had been
completed, a Russian triply-redundant computing system that controlled space station attitude
and environment suddenly failed.2 This system was critical in holding the space station stable
duringtheundockingoftheshuttle.Withoutthissystem,theshuttlemightnotbeabletoleavethe
spacestation.Inaddition,thespacestation’satmosphericcontrolsystemwasdisabled.
Itwasquicklydeterminedthatthefailurewascausedbythesimultanouslossofpowertoallthree
computers.Power hadbeenshutoffbyasurgeprotectionunitdesignedtoprotectthecomputers
from power surges beyond the capabilities of their own power filters. A NASA internal technical
report describing this failure said, “On 13 June, a complete shutdown of secondary power to all
(three) central computer and terminal computer channels occurred, resulting in the loss of
capabilitytocontrolISSRussiansegmentsystems.”
Finger Pointing
Russian officials were quick to blame NASA for “zapping their computers” with “dirty” 28-volt
power from the newly-installed solar array. Another theory was that the expanded station
structurefollowingthetruss installationsmightbeexcessivelychargingupduetoitsorbitalspeed
through Earth’s magnetic field. These were the first of many bad guesses by top Russian
programmanagersandwoulddistractengineerstryingtogettotherealsourceoftheproblem.
A Jury-Rigged Fix
In the meantime, the computers had to be fixed – and fast. The station crew assumed that some
external interference such as noise in the 28-volt power supply was responsible for generating
falsecommandsinsidethecomputers’power-monitoringsystem andcausedittosendshut-down
commands to all three computers. Based on this reasoning, they bypassed the power monitoring
system to two of the computers by using jumper cables. These two computers were now subject
to damage by power surges, but by now the power system had settled into a steady state and
wasgeneratingcleanpower.
By the time the shuttle undocked on June 19, the computers seemed to be operating properly;
and undocking proceeded without incident. Replacement parts were quickly sent via a robot
supply ship while analysis teams on the ground wrestled with why the system failed and why the
jumpercablescorrectedtheproblem.Wastheproblemreallyfixed,orcouldithappenagain?
Root-Cause Analysis
The ground engineers were not the only ones working on the problem. On board the space
station, the Russian commander Fyodor Yurchikhim and astronauts Oleg Kotov and Clayton
Anderson spent their time disassembling the power control boxes and the associated cabling in
order to look for clues that might lead to the cause of failure. Though multiple scopes and probes
failedtofindtheproblem,theireyesandfingersdid.
What they discovered was that the connection pins from the power monitoring unit were wet and
corroded. Continuity checks showed that the command lines in the cable coming off the unit had
failed. Even worse, one of the command lines had shorted. It was the power-off command line
that went to all three computers. The shorted condition created the disastrous power-off
command. The jumper cables had bypassed the false power-off command and had allowed the
computerstofunctionproperlyonceagain.
2
JamesOberg,SpaceStation:InternalNASAReportsExplainOriginsofJuneComputerCrisis,IEEESpectrumOnline;
October,2007(http://www.spectrum.ieee.org/oct07/5598).
2
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

But what had caused the corrosion? Water condensation, one of the most common problems in
space avionics. The problem was traced to a malfunctioning dehumidifier. As NASA later
reported, the problem presumably was “the result of repeated emissions of condensate from the
air separation lines” of a nearby dehumidifier. Though the power usage of the cables was
supposed to keep them warm enough to prevent condensation, the malfunctioning dehumidifier’s
frequent on-off cycles led to surges of water vapor. The situation was aggravated by a stream of
cold air from another location on the dehumidifier that at times cooled the cables below the dew
pointatwhichmoisturecouldcondense.
Chewing Gum and Duct Tape
Replacement units for the faulty components were quickly built by the European Space Agency
andsenttothespacestationonarobotsupplyship.
In August of 2007, the space shuttle Endeavor docked at the space station. The station’s
stabilization function was turned over to Endeavor, and the old computer network was torn down.
Thecrewfoundcondensatemixedwithmoldbehindthecomputerunits.
Whileinstallingthenewunitsandtheircables,itwasfoundthatonecablewas40centimeterstoo
short. After careful inspection, the crew could find no evidence of corrosion on the old cable, so
theydecidedtocontinueitsuse.
As further protection, the crew rigged a thermal barrier between the computers and the
dehumidifier. The thermal barrier was built using a surplus reference manual and ordinary gray
tape.
Finally, they removed the jumper cables, verified that the system was working, and closed the
accesspanels.Missionaccomplished.
The Fatal Design Flaw
Once the problem was understood, it became clear that the system suffered from a fatal design
flaw. The supposedly triply-redundant design included a single point of failure – the external
power monitoringunitthat, byitself,couldturnoff allof thecomputers.Should itfail(as it did due
tocondensation),thetriply-redundantsystemwasdown.
A proper triply-redundant system design would make sure that no single failure (or even a dual
failure) could take down the system. In this case, this condition could have been satisfied by
providingaseparatepowermonitoringunitforeachcomputer.
attitudeand attitudeand attitudeand attitudeand attitudeand attitudeand
environmental environmental environmental environmental environmental environmental
controlcomputer controlcomputer controlcomputer controlcomputer controlcomputer controlcomputer
power power power
power-offcommand
monitoring monitoring monitoring
unit unit unit
power
monitoring
unit 28-volt 28-volt 28-volt
stationpower stationpower stationpower
ProperTriply-RedundantDesign
28-volt
stationpower
SinglePointofFailure
3
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Lessons Learned
Therearetwomainlessonstobelearnedfromthisexperience:
 Oneistheobvious.If youaredesigningaredundantsystem,makesurethatthereareno
single points of failure. It is inconceivable that any good design engineer would
purposefully make such an error. However, single points of failure can be insidious; and
they may never be discovered despite exhaustive testing. It is only through careful peer
designreviewthatsuchdesignfaultscanbeuncovered.
 Theother lessonisthatfinger-pointingshouldnever beallowed.“Thiscannotpossiblybe
my fault. It has to be yours” is an attitude that is unacceptable. Until the problem is
resolved,itiseveryone’sproblem.Everyonemustassumethattheproblem lieswithinhis
area of responsibility and must continue to search for the cause until it is found. In this
case, the obvious cause was a malfunctioning power source installed by NASA.
However, it turned out that the problem was an improper design on the part of Russian
engineers,onethatwasaggravatedbyafaultydehumidifier.
These lessons ignore the faulty design and placement of the dehumidifier. Though it ended up
beingtheultimateculprit,aproperredundantdesignwouldhavebeentolerantofthismalfunction.
4
©2007SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
