What? No Internet?
February2008
On Wednesday, January 30, 2008, North Africa, the Middle East, and India experienced a
massive Internet outage that was destined to last for several days or even weeks.1 How did this
happen? How didcompanies cope? Could it happen inother areas suchas Europeor theUnited
States?
The Failure
The bulk of data traffic from North Africa, from the Middle Eastern countries, and from India and
Pakistan is routed through North Africa. There, it is carried by a set of three submarine cables
that lie under the Mediterranean Sea. The cables link Alexandria, Egypt, with Palermo, Italy,
wherethetrafficthenmovesontoEurope,theUK,andtheEasternUnitedStates.
On January 30, 2008, two of these three cables were severed. It is not yet known why, but the
predominant theory is that the cables were severed by the anchor of a huge freighter. Heavy
storms had hit the area the previous day and forced Egyptian authorities to close the northern
entrance to the Suez Canal at Alexandria. As a result, ships had to anchor offshore in the
Mediterranean Sea, dropping their anchors to ride out the storm. It is suspected that one of the
freightersdroppeditsanchorontopofthecables.
Reportedly, the two severed cables were a kilometer apart. The storm may have dragged the
freighter’sanchoracrosstheseabed,thustakingoutbothcables.
The result of this catastrophe was that 75% of channel capacity was lost from the Mideast to
Europeandbeyond.
Coincidentally,onthesameday,Telecom EgyptandFrance’s Alcatel-Lucentsignedadealtolay
a new $125 million submarine cable connecting Africa to Europe – a real-life case of too little too
late.
Is Cable Really That Important to the Internet?
It certainly is when it comes to intercontinental communications. More than 95% of transoceanic
telecommunications and data traffic is carried by submarine cables. The rest is carried by
satellite. Submarine cables account for the majority of communications between Europe and the
MiddleEast.
1USAToday;February1,2008.
AfricaReuters;January31,2008.
cnn.com;February1,2008.
Newsvine;January31,2008.
GulfTimes;February1,2008.
1
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

A single cable is no thicker than a human thumb but can carry an incredible amount of traffic. A
single pair of fiber cables can carry the equivalent of 150 million phone calls. Therefore, only a
few of these very expensive cables are needed to carry all of the traffic from a technically
accomplished region. Three cables did the trick for communications traffic between the Mideast
andEurope.
The Impact
The severed cables carried not onlyInternet traffic but also international telephone and television
traffic to the affected regions. The outage affected countries through a wide swath of the Middle
East and beyond, including Egypt, Saudi Arabia, The United Arab Emirates, Yemen, Qatar,
Bahrain,Kuwait,India,andPakistan.
About 70% of Egyptian users were affected. The Egyptian financial markets were disrupted.
Egypt’s call-center industry saw its productivity reduced by 70%. Egypt’s Telecom Ministry
requested users not to overload the backup system with hefty downloads and file-sharing
applications. An Egyptian blogger sarcastically predicted complete social breakdown in Cairo’s
upscaledistrictsasthousandsofuserswouldfinditimpossibletoupdatetheirFacebookstatus.
Betelco, the Bahraini communications company, also requested users not to overload the back-
up communication links with downloads and file-sharing applications. People downloading music
andfilmsweregoingtoaffectbusinesses,whichhavemoreimportantthingstodo,Betelcosaid.
SaudiTelecom reportedtheloss ofmorethan50% of its international lines,and Qatar reporteda
40%loss.
Perhaps the hardest hit in the region was Dubai, Bahrain’s major city. Dubai is, in the view of
many,therisingstar inthe MiddleEastcrownof hightechnologyand is responsiblefor billions of
dollarsworthoftransactionsdaily.
Information-technology companies, software companies, and call centers that provide online
service to the UK, to Europe, and to the U.S. East Coast were the worst affected. India’s $11-
billion outsourcing industry provides services ranging from answering customer queries to
analyzing equity markets. These services are provided to global clients that seek to cut costs by
outsourcing work. India’s outsourcing industry employs 700,000 people working for 1,250
companiesin30cities.
Among these companies, the hardest hit were those in the call-center industry. Call centers were
impacted not only by the loss of most of their Internet capacity but also by the degradation in
voice quality as telecommunications links were rerouted to longer cable runs across the Pacific
andtosatellitechannels.
India was also concerned that the outage could affect the trading patterns on its two major stock
exchanges,theNationalStockExchangeinDelhiandtheSENSEXexchangeinBombay.
Extending beyond India in the area, Bangladesh reported running at 25% of its usual capacity,
with ISPs andcall centers being affected.Sri Lankaexperienceda drastic drop inservicequality,
andPakistanwasaffected.
To add to the area’s woes, millions of South Asians work to send money home to their families
thatliveintheMideast.ThenextdaywasFriday,thefirstdayofthemonth.Itwasonthisdaythat
theseforeignworkerswoulddescendontheInternettosendmoneyhometotheirfamilies.
2
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Recovery and Restoration
When communication was lost over the severed cables, all traffic was rerouted to the third
surviving cable. This cable is an older cable with less capacity than the two newer cables that
were now failed. As a result, the third cable became seriously overloaded, making the Internet
almostuselessandvoicetrafficbarelyintelligible.
Once the magnitude of the outage was realized, backup plans (to the extent that they existed)
were put into place. Traffic from the Mideast and Africa had to be rerouted eastward through
Pacific cables aroundmostof theglobeor over satellitechannels.Theselonger channels caused
serious degradation in voice traffic and longer delays in Internet interactions than was normally
experiencedbutwithatleastacceptablequality.
Fortunately, many companies and some countries had contingency plans in place. Several large
companies had redundant routes over the Atlantic and Pacific oceans. Israel, Lebanon, and Iraq
(of all places) had backup satellite channels and switched over immediately with little if any
impactonusers.
Asofthis writing,conjecturewasthatitwouldtakeoneortwoweeks,perhapsmore,torepairthe
twocables.Effortstogettothecableswerethwartedbythecontinuingbadweather.
In order to repair the cables, the location of the break has to be determined; and then the cables
have to be dragged to the surface and the severed sections replaced with new lengths of cable.
The location of the break can be determined bysending down the cable a signal that will then be
reflected back to its source. By measuring the time delay of the reflection, the location of the
cablebreakcanbedetermined.
Onceships arriveatthebreak location,therepairtechniquedependsuponthedepthofthecable
atthatpoint:
 If the severed section is less than 4,000 feet below the surface, a submersible robot can
be sent. The robot finds the severed section, cuts it out, and drags the cable ends back
uptotherepairship.
 If the cable break is deeper than 4,000 feet, the cable technicians use a “grapnel” to cut
andholdthecableasitisbeingdraggedtothesurface.
 Once the cable ends have been brought to the surface, a skilled technician splices the
glassfibersandusesadhesivestoattachthenewsectionofcable.
 Therepairedcableisthenloweredonropesbacktotheseabed.
Could Such a Massive Internet Failure Have Been Foreseen?
Itseemsso,andthereislittleexcusefornothavingatestedcontingencyplaninplace.
Thereis asignificantprecedentfor suchafailure. One of thebiggestinterruptions of international
telecommunication services occurred in December, 2006, when a magnitude 7.1 earthquake
broke nine submarine cables between Taiwan and the Philippines and cut connections between
southeast Asia and the rest of the world. Internet links were down in China, Hong Kong, Japan,
Singapore, Taiwan, and the Philippines, disrupting banks, airlines, and email services. It took 49
daystorestorefullcapacity.
3
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Why would anyone think that this couldn’t happen again, or happen to them? Indeed, a recent
report by the Business Roundtable,2 a consortium of CEOs of large U.S. companies, says that
there is a 10% to 20% chance of a breakdown of our critical information infrastructure in the next
ten years. This outage certainly beat their timetable. They suggest that this breakdown could be
brought about by malicious code, coding error, natural disasters, or attacks by terrorists or other
adversaries.Howaboutman-madedisasters,likeadraggingshipanchor?
Theypointoutthatbusiness executives oftenfail torealize how dependent theyhave becomeon
the Internet for email, collaboration, ecommerce, public interfaces, and internal web sites. These
executives fail to take into account in their disaster recovery and business continuity plans the
threat of an Internet disruption to their companies or to their suppliers. After all, in all of the
decadesoftheInternet,thishasneverhappenedtothemortotheirpeers.
Butasthisincidentshows,itcanhappen.Aftertherecentcablebreak,aDubaianalystnotedthat
whenitcomestogreattechnology,it’snotaboutbuildingit,it’showtoprotectit.
Lessons Learned
If your company depends upon the Internet for its day-to-day well-being, it is incumbent on you
for the sake of your company, your suppliers, your customers, and your shareholders to ensure
that your business can continue should you lose your primary Internet infrastructure. This is all
the more important if you are a supplier of web services such as web hosting or software-as-a-
service.
The first line of defense is a contingency plan to get reconnected to the Internet. The hours
following a massive channel failure is no time to tryto negotiate backup channel capacity– there
mightnotbeany.Thereareseveralcompaniesthatoffersatellitebackupservices,suchasVSAT
Systems (www.vsat-systems.com). Another is the FailSafe service from Ground Control
(www.groundcontrol.com) that covers the contiguous 48 states in the U.S. via the Galileo
stationarysatellite.
Beyondthefirstlineofdefensemustbeadeepercontingencyplan.Asolidknowledgeofnetwork
topology is essential in order to arrange additional meaningful contingency agreements with
alternate ISPs. Furthermore, contingencyplans are meaningless without live testing in which you
reallypulltheplugandswitchovertoyourcontingencypath.
Finally, for the company that is truly serious about continuous uptime, the primary data center
must be replicated to a remote facility with rapid failover. This is where active/active system
technologycanplayamajorrole,reducingfailovertimefromhoursordaystoseconds.3
Postscript
Two days later, on February 1, another cable in the Persian Gulf 35 miles north of Dubai was
severed,causingdisruptionsbetweentheMiddleEastandparts ofAsia.Thisonewascausedby
a5½tonabandonedanchor.
Yes,massiveInternetinterruptionscanoccur!
2GaryAnthes,TheInternetisDown–NowWhat?,ComputingSA,http://mybroadband.co.xa/news/print/2674.html;
January28,2008.
3WhatIsActive/Active?,AvailabilityDigest;October,2006.
4
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
