Business Continuity from A to Z
December2010
Business Continutiy from A to Z is a five-part series of white papers1 (more accurately, a five-
chapter, 100-page book) that discusses best practices for Business Continuity Planning (BCP).
Written byGreg Livingston, ABCP, CDRP, Managing Director of Centurion Compliance Partners,
LLC,his book follows thestandardapproachto BCPandexplores theresponsibilities of all of the
stakeholdersintheplan.
Thefivepartsinclude:
 Part1:Contingencies:Areyourbasescovered?
 Part2:BusinessImpactAnalysis:Theall-importantfoundation.
 Part3:ThinkitThrough:Effectivestrategy,development&documentation.
 Part4:YourBCToolkit:Optionsandintegration.
 Part5:TheFinalCountdown:Rollout,testing,andresults.
Implementing a comprehensive business continuity (BC) plan involves a significant ongoing
investment in staff time, technology, tools, and training. These white papers provide a roadmap
fornavigatingthroughthevariousstepsrequiredtobuildandmaintainaneffectiveBCplan.
Part 1: Contingencies: Are your bases covered?
Recognizing the need for companies to survive debilitating disasters, various industry
associations and governments began developing in the early 1990s guidelines and even
regulations for achieving business continuity. BC planning is now its own industry and includes
organizations providing hot sites, data-backup services, communications, software tools,
consulting, and dedicated publications. Educational opportunities abound and lead to a variety of
certifications.
Plausiblescenariosthatcanseriouslyimpactacompany’soperationsinclude:
 Networkoutages  Earthquakes  Hacking
 Websitefailures  Hurricanes  Theftofintellectualproperty
 Floodingandfires  Epidemics  Streetprotests
 Powerfailures  Volcaniceruptions  Carelessconstructionerrors
1GregLivingston,BusinessContinuityfromAtoZ,CenturionCompliancePartnersandMIR3whitepaper.
www.mir3.com/bcwhitepaper1,www.mir3.com/bcwhitepaper2,www.mir3.com/bcwhitepaper3,
www.mir3.com/bcwhitepaper4,www.mir3.com/bcwhitepaper5
1
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Potential costs of downtime include loss of revenue, loss of customers, loss of employee
productivity, compensatory payments, drop in credit rating, drop in stock price, litigation, and loss
ofreputation.Whenitcomestobusinessinterruption,itisnotamatterofifbutof when. Failingto
planisplanningtofail.
WhatisBusinessContinuityPlanning?
BCplanningisthecontinuousprocessof
1. identifyingrisksandtheirimpactsoncriticalbusinessfunctions,
2. developingstrategiesformitigatingtheserisks,and
3. developingproceduresforrestoringbusinessfunctionsasquicklyaspossible.
Business continuity is not the same as disaster recovery (DR). DR is an important part of
business continuity and deals with recovering IT systems, applications, and data. BC planning
encompasses:
 riskmanagement  qualitymanagement  security
 disasterrecovery  healthandsafety  crisiscommunications
 facilitiesmanagement  knowledgemanagement  publicrelations
 massabsenteeplanning  emergencymanagement
The most important reasons to implement a business plan are the saving of lives, the survival of
the business, the obligations to stakeholders, regulatory compliance, maintaining customer
service,andminimizingfinancialloss.AgoodBCplanwillallowacompanyto:
 identifyandmitigaterisksbeforeadisasteroccurs.
 minimizedecisiontimeduringadisaster.
 maintainacalmpreparednesswhenadisasteroccurs.
 provideforanorderlyrecoveryfollowingadisaster.
 ensureorganizationalstability.
 reducerelianceonkeypersonnel.
 reducepotentialforlegalliability.
 meetcustomerexpectationsandservicelevelagreements.
 safeguardreputationandbrand.
 maintaincompetitiveposition.
 provideearlywarningofvulnerabilitiestodisasters.
 potentiallyrealizebetterinsurancecostsandcoverage.
RegulationsandStandards
Many regulations and standards covering numerous industries have been published. The author
lists many of these. A leading reference is the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council
(FFIEC)BCPHandbook.2
ManagementSupport
It is not in the nature of many organizations for support of a BC plan to come from below – staff
has too many other responsibilities and duties to make business continuity a priority. Rather, BC
planning has to be mandated from the top. Getting management to support a BC plan can often
2BusinessContinuityPlanning:ITExaminationHandbook,AvailabilityDigest;October2006.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0101/bcp-it_examination_handbook.pdf.
2
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

be a frustrating experience. The author discusses several tips for gaining top management buy-
in.
Approach management with specific objectives, but take what you can get. Present the benefits,
and be prepared in advance to overcome objections. Research the competition to find out what
they are doing – BC can be a competitive advantage. Point out the legal ramifications, including
criminalliability,heavyfines,andevenjailtime.
BCPlanning
Once planning has obtained management support, the BC implementation team must be
assembled. This should include a top-management representative, a BC coordinator reporting to
the management representative, and lower-level teams representative of the various business
functions.
BCplanningfollowsfivedistinctphases:
1. Identify potential hazards that could disrupt the business. This is the Risk Assessment
discussedlaterinthispart.
2. Analyze the impact of these risks on the various
business functions. This is the Business Impact
Analysis (BIA) that establishes the Recovery Time
Objectives (RTOs), Recovery Point Objectives
(RPOs), the minimum operating resources, and
the internal and external dependencies for each
business function. The BIA provides the
foundation for the BC plan and is the subject of
Part2.
3. Design the mitigation and recovery strategies to
protect people, assets, and business functions.
Part3addressestheDesignphase.
4. Execute the development of the plan. There are a
number of tools available to help with the organization, documentation, and
implementation of the plan. Part 4discusses therange of tools available (withno specific
referencetoanyparticulartool).
5. Measuretheplanviaasequenceofteststrategiesrangingfromexaminationtosimulated
disasters.TestingiscoveredinPart5.
Thesefivephasesarecontinuous.Asthecompanyevolves,somusttheBCplan.
TheRiskAssessmentPhase
The first phase is the Risk Assessment. In this phase, the risks to the organization caused by
various hazards are identified. Hazards include natural threats such as hurricanes, earthquakes,
and floods; human threats such as operator errors, vandalism, and terrorism; and technical
threatssuchasserverorsoftwaremalfunctions,powerorcoolinglosess,andnetworkfailures.
The likelihood of each hazard is estimated. Various attributes for each hazard are then scored.
Attributes include the speed of onset and the consequent degree of forewarning (hurricanes are
predictedwellinadvance,butearthquakesprovidenowarning),thedurationofthehazardandits
3
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

consequences, and the impact on the business. The result is an overall score for each hazard,
whichallowsthethreatstobeprioritizedfortheBusinessImpactAnalysis.
BCBestPractices
Part 1 concludes with some BC best practices. Don’t cut corners – BC planning is a continuous
process. Keep the plan simple – nobody will read a 100-page plan. Control the costs of recovery
by using available assets. Follow a standard or a handbook such as the FFIEC BCP handbook.
Make use of available tools for BCP preparation and event management. Test the plan, and plan
testsattimesthatareconvenienttothestakeholders.PracticetheBCPplanfrequently.
Part 2: Business Impact Analysis: The all-important foundation
Foreachrisk identifiedintheRisk Analysis,theBusinessImpactAnalysis(BIA)documentswhich
businessprocesseswillbedisrupted,theseverityofthedisruptiontoeachbusinessprocess,and
how long the business can survive without those processes. It identifies the processes that are
mostcriticaltothecompany’soperationsandtheinterdependenciesofprocesses.
The BIA then establishes the minimum resources required to recover business processes to a
minimum acceptable level. It prioritizes the allocation of recovery activities and resources to
restorethemostcriticalprocessesfirst,whichisthebasisofasoundrecoverystrategy.
The recovery requirements set forth in the BIA – required resources, process interdependencies,
maximum allowable downtime,and so forth – becomethe test criteria against which the recovery
planandthoseofcriticalsuppliersmustbejudged.Itisimperativethattherecoveryrequirements
not overstate the criticality of business processes and their required recovery times since
recoverycostsescalateparabolicallyastherequiredrecoverytimesdecrease.
Preparing a good BIA is resource-intensive and must be supported by top management.
Approach top management with an executive summary recapping the reasons that the
organization bought into the BCP effort initially. Review the threats uncovered in the Risk
Analysis, and explain how the BIA will be used with the Risk Analysis to provide the basis for an
effective recovery plan. Explain how staff will be used to gather the requisite data while
minimizing the impact to their work day and how they will share in the ownership of the recovery
process.ShowhowtheBIAcanbeusedforotherpurposessuchasvulnerabilityassessmentand
incidentresponse.
GatheringtheData
TheBIArequiresthatthefollowingdatabeobtainedanddocumented:
 Allbusinessprocessesperformedbyeachdepartment.
 The resources – technologies, people and supplies – required by each process to
functionproperly.
 The interdependencies of processes within departments, across departments, and with
third-partyvendors.
 Thecriticalityofeachbusinessprocesstothehealthandsurvivaloftheorganization.
 The maximum allowable downtime for each process (the Recovery Time Objective, or
RTO).
 How current does the data have to be following recovery (the Recovery Point Objective,
orRPO).
