More Never Agains VIII
February2013
Since our last summary of multiple data center failures, published in our September, 2012, issue of the
Availability Digest, we have reported on several major outages. They have included the DDoS
(Distributed Denial of Service) attacks on several major U.S. banks, attacks that took down their online
websites for several days in retaliation for the YouTube video entitled “The Innocence of Islam;” a
Republican-partysecretweapon whosefailuremayhavecostMittRomneytheU.S.PresidentialElection;
amemoryleak thattook downan AmazonWebServices AvailabilityZonefor severalhours;severaldata
centers that were out for days after Hurricane Sandy flooded generators located in basements in lower
Manhattan; and a violent storm (not Sandy) that left millions of residents of Northern Virginia without 911
serviceforfourdays.
Severalotheroutagesmadeheadlinesduringthistimeandaresummarizedbelow.
Chinese Hackers Attack the New York Times
In October, 2012, the New York Times was preparing to expose a multibillion dollar fortune obtained
through perhaps nefarious business dealings by relatives of Wen Jiabao, China’s prime minister. It was
then that suspected Chinese hackers infiltrated the Times’ computer systems and stole the passwords of
its reporters and other employees. Though the attackers could have wreaked havoc on the Times’
computers, they did not. It seems their purpose was to identify Chinese citizens who may have provided
informationtotheNewYorkTimesconcerningMr.Jiabao’sbusinessdealings.
Security expert firm Mandiant was hired by the Times and identified the attacks as similar to earlier
attacksperpetratedbytheChinesemilitary.Theattackswerenotmadedirectlybutratherthroughseveral
computersatU.S.universitiesinanattempttohidethesourceoftheattacks.
The security experts found evidence that the hackers stole the passwords of every employee of the
Times and used these passwords to gain access to the computers of 53 of the employees. The hackers
evidently initiated their attack by snooping around for two weeks through back doors that they had
opened in the systems until they found the domain controller that contained the user names and their
hashed passwords. Even though the passwords were protected by hashing, hashed passwords can be
easily cracked via the use of published “rainbow tables” that give hash values for nearly every
alphanumericcharactercombination.
It is still not known how the hackers broke into the Times’ computers, but it is strongly suspected that it
was through a spear-phishing attack that requires just one employee to download just one malicious
email that will install malware. This malware can then siphon off oceans of data, including keystrokes,
screenimages,documents,microphones,andcameras.
1
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Over the course of three months, the attackers installed 45 pieces of malware. The Times’ antivirus
protectionfromSymanticfoundonlyoneoftheseandquarantinedit.
Oncedetected,theTimes’allowedthehackerstospinadigitalwebforfourmonthstoidentifyeveryback
door that was being used to gain access to the system. The Times then replaced every compromised
computerandsetupdefensestopreventfurtherinfections.
MandiantreportsthatithastracedseveralothercorporatecyberattackstotheChinesemilitary.
The Gozi Trojan is Finally Saddled
Starting in 2007, whencomputer users aroundthe world would logintotheir bankingaccounts,theywere
greeted with a message that said, “In order to provide you with extra security, we occasionally need to
askforadditionalinformationwhenyouaccessyouraccountonline.”
This was not a message from the bank. It was a message from the Gozi Trojan that had infected the
users’ computers. Many were duped into entering their social security numbers, their mother’s maiden
names,andotherpersonalinformation.
As soon as the information was entered, the Gozi Trojan sent it to a server in California, and then to a
central command and control server in the Netherlands. The personal data was sold to other
cybercriminals, who used it to access accounts and to steal deposits. Tens of millions of dollars were
stolenfromoveramillionaccountsworldwide,including40,000intheU.S.
In early 2013, three Eastern European men were arrested by U.S. law enforcement and charged with
operating the Gozi scheme. Themastermind was a Russian. A Latvian was charged with writing some of
the code, and a Romanian was charged with operating a hosting service that allowed the Gozi Trojan to
bedistributed.Stillatlargeisanunknownprogrammerwhowrotetheoriginalcode.
Thethreemenfacecriminalcharges rangingfrom conspiracytocomputer intrusionandbank fraud.They
eachface60to90yearsinprison.
Amazon Takes Out Netflix Over Christmas
Shortly after Noon, Pacific Standard Time, on Christmas Eve Day 2012, as families gathered to watch
movies, Netflix stopped streaming. The outage lasted until almost Noon the next day, Christmas Day. A
developer error took down amajor portion of Amazon Web Services’ East Coast AvailabilityZone. Netflix
dependsupontheAmazoncloudforitsstreamingservices.
According to Amazon, the outage began when a developer accidentally deleted data while performing
maintenance on the East Coast Elastic Load Balancing system (ELB). The developer’s action impacted
almost 10% of the ELBs. The ELB distributes traffic across several compute instances in different
AvailabilityZones.Asaresult,sometrafficcouldnotbedistributedandcametoahalt.
Because of this experience, Amazon has instituted a new procedure that requires developers to obtain
specificchangeapprovalfromAWSeachtimetheyaccesstheELBsystem.
Failures of AWS can impact a major portion of Internet services around the world. AWS now handles
morethan835,000requestspersecondforhundredsofthousandsofcustomersin190countries.
Microsoft’s Azure Cloud Down – Again
JustaweekafterAmazonlostitscloudoverChristmas,Microsoft’sAzureCloudfollowedsuit.
2
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

A year ago, Amazon’s Azure Cloud was knocked out by a 2012 leap-year software bug for over a day.1
Almost a year later, on December 28, 2012, Microsoft reported that it had lost the Azure Storage service
foritsSouthCentralU.S.Region.IttookovertwodaysforMicrosofttorestoreservice.
According to Microsoft, the outage affected about 2% of Windows Azure Storage accounts that were
located in one cluster. Making matters worse was that the Azure health dashboard wasn’t working
becausetheoutageaffectedtheAzureworldwideManagementPortalthatdependeduponthiscluster.
According to a detailed blog posted by Microsoft, three issues led to the outage. First, some of the
storage nodes did not have protection turned on. Second, the monitoring system that is supposed to
detectthisconditionhada defect,resultinginnoalarmsorescalation.Third,atransitiontoanewprimary
nodetriggeredareactionthatledtoanincorrectformattingofothernodes.
Normally, Azure should have survived the failure of two nodes of storage, as it keeps three copies of the
dataspreadacrossthreeseparatefaultdomains.However,thereformattednodeswerespreadacrossall
threefaultdomains,leadingtothetotalunavailabilityofthedata.
Going forward, Microsoft will offer optional geographical redundancyto improve availability. A copy of the
data will be replicated to a remote location and will be available for read-only access by the customer.
Should the primary copy fail, the customer will have a choice as to whether to fail over (maximize data
availability)ornottofailover(maximizedatadurability).
South Carolina Computers Hacked for Three Million Social Security Numbers
In early October, 2012, the South Carolina Division of Information Technology informed the S.C.
Department of Revenue of a potential cyber attack involving the personal information of state taxpayers.
After verifying that this may have happened, the Dept. of Revenue retained security firm Mandiant to
analyzethebreak,plugtheholes,anddeterminethedamage.
Mandiant’s assessment was that a Dept. of Revenue employee unwittingly executed malware by clicking
on a malicious link in a salacious email. The malware stole the employee’s credentials and allowed the
hackers to gain access to the system. By the time the malicious code was identified and shut down ten
days later, the hackers were able to access other Dept. of Revenue systems and databases. They stole
millionsofsocialsecuritynumbersandbankaccountsandalmostahalf-millioncreditcardnumbers,most
butnotallofthemfortunatelyencrypted.
South Carolina officials pointed their fingers at Russian hackers and blamed the IRS for not requiring
them to encrypt social security numbers. But Mandiant placed the blame on state officials. The state’s
Dept. of Revenue director had declined an offer from the state’s IT department for free breach-detection
services. As a consequence, the state failed to spot the compromise of forty-four different systems, the
installation of backdoor software, multiple instances of password hashes being dumped, the running of
Windows batch scripts, and the execution of numerous commands against the databases. The attacker
located and copied 74 GB of backup files to an external server outside of the state’s control. Though
finally detected in mid-October, the attacks had been going on for a month. The director has since
resigned.
The state’s bill for the data breach is expected to exceed $14 million, including Mandiant’s bill, taxpayer
notifications, Experian credit services offered to those whose data was breached, securityimprovements,
andlegalandpublicrelationsexpenses.
1WindowsAzureCloudSuccumbstoLeapYear,AvailabilityDigest;March2012.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0703/azure.pdf
3
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

United Airlines Grounded by Nationwide Computer Glitch
Acomputer problem inUnited’s Unimatic system usedfor its groundoperations broughtflights across the
country to a halt at 8:30 AM on Thursday, November 15th. Though the problem was resolved two hours
later, it was too late for many flights. Ten flights were cancelled, and 636 flights were delayed either
directly by the outage or by delays in earlier flights. The delays affected most major cities in the United
StatesandevensomeforeigncitiessuchasLondon.
The problem involved communication between dispatchers at the company’s operations center in
Chicago and planes at airports around the world. The dispatchers communicate such information as
weightandfuelloadstopilots,whoneedtheinformationtooperatetheflight.
United merged with Continental Airlines in 2010. but Continental and United Express flights were not
affected. United has been struggling with technology problems associated with integrating the computing
systemsofthetwoairlines sincethemerger.ItexperiencedproblemsinMarch,2012,whenitswitchedto
a passenger information system previously used by Continental. The system needed significant
reworking. United suffered another outage in May. In August, 2012, 580 United flights were delayed; and
itswebsitewasshutdownfortwohoursbecauseofaserverfailure.
GitHub Downed Twice by Network Software Errors
GitHub is a major open-source repository and collaborative site hosting millions of public repositories. In
November, 2012, it suffered a major outage as it attempted to upgrade its network. The verynext month,
itagainsufferedalongeroutageforsimilarreasons.
The November outage occurred when GitHub attempted to restructure its network from a linear network
to a tree structure in order to improve transit time. Instead of traffic being routed through many network
switches, the new network would be a three-level tree network; and traffic onlyhad to pass through three
switches. When it tried to bring up the network, GitHub found the network to be flooded with self-
generated traffic. Working with its (unnamed) switch vendor, GitHub determined that the switches were
not learning the MAC addresses held by their neighbors. Therefore, for many interswitch transfers, the
destination address was being flooded to all of the switches in the network to determine the servicing
port.Ittooktwohourstodeterminetheproblemandtorestorethenetworktooperation.
Having resolvedthis problem,GitHubscheduled amaintenance window in late December toupgrade the
switch software provided by its switch vendor. Its switching network is completely redundant, so the plan
wastoupgradeonesidefirst,testit,andthentofailoverandupgradetheotherside.Unfortunately,there
wasaproblemintheswitchfailoverprocess;andthenetworkcollapsedforseveralminutes.
This caused the redundant file server clusters to lose heartbeats. Each file server assumed that its
companion had failed and subsequently tried to take over. To ensure against “split brain” operation, part
of the takeover involves killing power to the supposed bad server. Each server cut power to its
companion, and in manyclusters both servers were taken offline. It took five hours to restore the servers
and their databases before GitHub could get back into service. Evidently, GitHub does not deploy an
independentmonitoringQuorumservertoresolvesuchconflicts.
Summary
Theseoutages werecausedbya widerangeofproblems.Includedwereausererror(Amazon),software
bugs (Microsoft Azure, United, GitHub), and hardware (United). However, in this summary, for the first
time, cyber attacks were predominant (New York Times, the Gozi Trojan and the South Carolina
Departmentof Revenue). As wesee datacenters becomeincreasinglyrobust withrespecttofailures, we
arenowwitnessingmoreproblemswithmajormalwareinfections.
4
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com