HPE Cyber Risk Report 2016
March2016
HPE has released its 2016 Cyber Risk Report.1 Prepared bythe HPE SecurityResearch
team, it is an extensive report (96 pages) that examines the vulnerabilities that leave
organizations exposed to data breaches. It is no longer a question of ‘if’ an organization will be attacked
but ‘when.’ The report provides insights into how security funds and personnel can be better allocated to
counterthethreatsandtoprepareabetterbreachresponse.
Thereportfocusesonsevenkeythemes:
Theme#1:Theyearofcollateraldamage.
Theme#2:Overreachingregulationspushresearchunderground.
Theme#3:Movingfrompointfixestobroadimpactsolutions.
Theme#4:Politicalpressuresattempttodecoupleprivacyandsecurityefforts.
Theme#5:Theindustrydidn’tlearnanythingaboutpatchingin2015.
Theme#6:Attackershaveshiftedtheireffortstodirectlyattackapplications.
Theme#7:Themonetizationofmalware.
Theme 1: The Year of Collateral Damage
Anthem, Inc., is the second largest health insurer in the United States. In late 2014, hackers stole almost
80millionhealthrecordsfromAnthem.ItwasthelargestdatabreachtodateofanyU.S.healthinsurer.2
If this made 2014 the Year of the Breach, 2015 has become the Year of Collateral Damage. Certain
attacksaffectedpeoplewhoneverdreamedthattheywouldbethevictimsofadatabreachbecausethey
did not knowingly have their personal data stored anywhere. However, they were affected by data as it
relatedtosomeoneelse.
1HPESecurityResearchCyberRiskReport2016,HPESecurityResearch;2016.
http://www8.hp.com/us/en/software-solutions/cyber-risk-report-security-vulnerability/index.html?jumpid=va_kxdmr1h9cv
2AnthemLoses80MillionRecordstoHackers,AvailabilityDigest;March2015.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/1003/anthem_hack.pdf
1
©2016SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

In April, 2015, the U.S. Government’s Office of Personnel Management (OPM) discovered that its
database had been breached.3 The data theft had been going on for almost a year. The government
determined that the information of over 21 million people had been compromised. The victims included
anyonewhohadworkedforthegovernmentorwhohadtriedtoworkforthegovernment.
The data for each victim included a 120-page employment application that included sensitive information
on virtually every aspect of the victim’s personal history needed for security clearance, including
extensive lists of relatives and friends. It was these relatives and friends that suffered collateral damage.
Some of their personal information now had been exposed, including names, addresses, email
addresses,andsocialsecuritynumbers.
AmoresordidexamplewasthedatabreachofAshleyMadison.4AshleyMadisonisthepremierewebsite
for the married who wanted to cheat on their spouses. The worst happened for members of the web site.
Its database was hacked and was posted online for all to see. The data stored in the Ashley Madison
membership database included names, email addresses, street addresses, phone numbers, and sexual
fantasies.
With a quick search of an email address, spouses could find out if their ‘better” halves had been trying to
cheat on them. Divorces and suicides followed. Even more embarrassing for those victimized by adultery
was that friends and neighbors could find out who they were from the information posted about their
cheatingotherhalves.
Theme #2: Overreaching Regulations Push Research Underground
When massive data breaches occur, legislation frequently is introduced hastily to “correct” the problem
and protect data. However, too often the legislation has unintended consequences that can push
legitimatesecurityresearchunderground.Tobeeffective,regulationsimpactingsecuritymustprotectand
encourageresearchthatbenefitseveryone.
The recent overturn of the U.S./E.U. safe haven bythe European courts can be a problem for many. The
safe haven allowed U.S. companies to store data in the European Union so long as they followed U.S.
security regulations and vice versa. However, now U.S. companies must follow E.U. regulations when
storing data in the E.U.; and European companies must follow U.S. regulations when storing data in the
U.S. One major difference is that in the E.U., the storage of a person’s sensitive data requires an opt-in
fromthatperson,whereasintheU.S.anopt-outprocedureisfollowed.
Another example is the Wassenaar Arrangement, which has been implemented by more than forty
countries. This agreement uses export controls as a means to combat terrorism by promoting
transparency and greater responsibility in the transfer of conventional arms and dual-use technology.
However, the recent inclusion of “intrusion software” in the Wassenaar Arrangement may be a backlash
inresponsetomalicioussecurityofferingsaimedatcompromisingsystems.
We can expect to see further extensions of the Wassenaar Arrangement and other legislation that may
make protecting against data breaches harder. This, in turn, promotes the likelihood of successful
breaches;astheenvironmentincreasinglyfavorsthoseoperatingintheblackmarket.
3TheGovernmentOPMHackGetsWorse,AvailabilityDigest;July2015.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/1007/OPM_attack_2.pdf
4AshleyMadisonCheatsExposed,AvailabilityDigest;August2015.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/1008/ashley_madison.pdf
2
©2016SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Another example of over-regulation was a submission for public comment by the U.S. Department of
Commerce’sBureauofIndustryandSecurity(BIS)toimposeanincrediblybroadsetofcontrolsrelatedto
intrusion software. These controls were so broad that they would make much of today’s defensive
cybersecurity research untenable, if not criminal. The outcry from the community helped sway BIS into
withdrawingitsproposedchanges.
Theme #3: Moving from Point Fixes to Broad Impact Solutions
In 2015, Apple and Microsoft both released more patches to their software than at any prior point in their
histories. It is not clear if this level of patching is sustainable, either by the vendors or by the users who
mustinstallthepatches.
Patches were successful at breaking the common exploit techniques of the time, but attackers worked
their way around the defenses. The cat-and-mouse game between software vendors and exploit writers
continued with new exploit-specific mitigations being released and new malicious techniques quickly
following. While these mitigations evolved, new vulnerabilities continued to be discovered and patches
deployed.
Recently, vendors that receive hundreds of vulnerability reports began taking a different approach to
software mitigations. As an example, rather than focusing on specific vulnerabilities, Microsoft now is
making headway with defensive measures that correct entire classes of vulnerabilities in its browser. It
andothervendorsmustinvestinthesebroadfixesthatknockoutmanyvulnerabilitiesatonce.
Theme #4: Political Pressures Attempt to Decouple Privacy and Security Efforts
The revelations of Edward Snowden and other whistleblowers have led to a difficult year for the balance
between privacy, encryption, and security. Privacy issues gave the security world much to discuss and
ponderthroughout2015.
Many lawmakers claim that security is only possible if fundamental rights to privacy are abridged. There
are some in the U.S. Congress who want to give their national security agencies a blank check. These
membersfeelthatanyattempttoprotectprivacysomehowmakesthecountrylesssafe.Otherssuggesta
framework of ‘balancing’ privacyrights and national security. Still others argue that privacyrights are pre-
eminent. Protecting basic privacy rights and protecting the country are not part of a zero-sum equation.
Bothcanbeaccomplished.
Given this ongoing debate, those evaluating the security of their enterprises would do well to monitor
governmenteffortssuchasadding“backdoors”toencryptionandothersecuritytools.
Theme #5: The Industry Didn’t Learn Anything About Patching in 2015
Almost 50% of the top ten vulnerabilities exploited in 2015 are over five years old. Microsoft Windows
vulnerabilitiesaccountfor50%ofalldiscoveredvulnerabilities.
While vendors continue to publish patches to correct discovered vulnerabilities, the patches do little good
if users do not install them. A major problem is that applying patches in an enterprise can be risky and
expensive, especially when the patches cause other problems. The most common rationale given by
thosewhodisableautomaticpatchupdatesorwhofailtoinstallpatchesisthatpatchesbreakthings.
3
©2016SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Amajor challengefor softwarevendors is that itis nearlyimpossibletocompletelytest apatch’s abilityto
have no adverse effect on some function, given the complexity of today’s software products. However, it
is incumbent upon software vendors to win back the trust of their customers in order to help restore faith
intheirpatches.
Theme #6: Attackers Have Shifted Their Efforts to Directly Attack Applications
It used to be that attackers would attempt to enter the perimeter of a system’s network and attack the
system software. However, with the wide use of mobile devices, the attackers have moved to mobile
applications.Theyseethisastheeasiestroutetoaccessingsensitiveenterprisedata.
From the perspective of applications and platforms, Android is second only to Windows as a targeted
platform. Of interest, Android’s main threats are potentially unwanted applications and advertising
frameworkscollectingprivateandpotentiallyidentifiableuserinformation.
Today’s security practitioner must understand the risk of convenience and interconnectivity to adequately
protectenterprisedata.
Theme #7: The Monetization of Malware
In 2015, malware took on a new focus. Moving from its use to execute data breaches, malware now is
producing revenue. This has led to an increase in ATM-related malware, banking Trojans, and
ransomware.
AttackstargetingATMsgenerallyfallintooneoftwocategories:
 Stealingcreditcardinformation.Theseattacksmayusehardwaresuchasskimmers,software
loadedontotheATM,oracombinationofboth.
 Directlydispensingcash.Theseattacksrelyondirectlybypassingcardauthenticationandare
performedatthesoftwarelevel.
While there is no definitive answer as to what contributes to the rise of ATM malware, it is likely that an
aging ATM fleet plays a significant role. The ease of access to the inner workings of certain ATMs and
their locationscontributeas well.WhatiscertainisthatcybercriminalsattackingATMsarewell-organized
andoperateinternationally.
Banking Trojans continue to use Microsoft Office Word documents and Excel spreadsheets as the
favored means of infection. Many businesses use these programs to conduct day-to-day operations,
whichprovidesabroaduserbaseforattackerstotarget.
Ransomware wreaks havoc by encrypting files of private and corporate users alike. Once encrypted, the
malwareauthortypicallydemandsransom,oftenintheformofBitcoinsforanonymity,inexchangeforthe
decryptionkeysrequiredtorestorethefiles.
The best protection against ransomware is to frequently back up all important files on the system. By
default, Windows keeps shadow copies of all files in the user’s home folder. Sometimes the system can
4
©2016SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

be recovered from a ransomware attack by restoring shadow copies, but ransomware authors will try to
disableshadowcopyrestoresbydeletingthem.
Bug Bounties
Aflipsideofmalwaremonetization is bugbounties.Securityresearchers nowhaveamultitudeof options
availabletobenefitfromtheirdiscoveriesofvulnerabilities:
 The White Market – Bug-bounty programs and hacking contests provide responsible disclosure
opportunities to the software vendors who often will pay a researcher for newly discovered bugs.
Companies who provide bug-bounty programs include Google, Facebook, Netscape, and United
Airlines.5
 The Gray Market – Some legitimate researchers operate in a legal gray zone by selling their
newly discovered vulnerabilities to governments and law-enforcement agencies in countries
aroundtheworld.
 TheBlack Market–Vulnerabilitiescanbesoldtothehighestbidderandusedtodisruptprivateor
publicindividualsandgroups.
A major entryinto bug bounty programs is the Zero-Day Initiative (ZDI) program. A zero-day vulnerability
isonethathasbeennewlydiscovered,leavingthesoftwarevendorwithzerodaystofixit.
ZDIistheworld’slargestvendor-agnosticbug-bountyprogram.Itcompensatesresearchersforsubmitting
their vulnerability finds. Founded in 2005, ZDI has disclosed over 2,000 vulnerabilities and has paid out
USD$12millionincashawards.
Summary
The HPE Cyber Risk Report 2016 provides a wealth of information to help defeat data breaches and
other malware attacks. It should be studied by every security specialist who is tasked with defending the
dataandsystemsofhisenterprise.
5UnitedAirlines’BugBountyProgram,AvailabilityDigest;July2015.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/1007/UA_bug_bounty.pdf
5
©2016SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com