– Our June Twitter Feed of Outages
June 2017
A challenge every issue for the Availability Digest is to determine which of the many
availability topics out there win coveted status as Digest articles. We always regret not
focusing our attention on the topics we bypass. With our new Twitter presence, we don’t
have to feel guilty. This article highlights some of the tweets that made headlines in
recent days.
Recent Chase Outage Cripples Mobile Payments for Hours
Recently, JPMorgan Chase customers experienced an outage that included online bill pay and the
Chase QuickPay mobile payments service, which handles the increasingly popular peer-to-peer
(P2P) payments service. The services cut out around four in the afternoon but were brought back
around 8:30. Four and a half hours without bill pay and mobile payments isn’t exactly good news; but
for most, it was a safe bet that disruption was minimal. For Chase, however, which lost out on a
bunch of payments to process and cash accordingly as well as a loss of face in the market the
losses were much greater.
https://t.co/jQep2bJWJc
Preparing for the Cyberattack That Will Knock Out U.S. Power Grids
Cyberattacks are unavoidable, but we’re not going to stop using computerized systems. Instead, we
should be preparing for the inevitable, including a major cyberattack on power grids and other
essential systems. This requires the ability to anticipate not only an unprecedented event but also
the ripple effects that it could cause.
https://t.co/G8yl4ErWph
LPL Financial Hit by System-Wide Technology Outage
May 12th’s global cyber-attack by unknown hackers across numerous businesses around the world
wasn't the only negative technology-related development. Less widely publicized was a system-wide
technology outage at one of the country's independent broker-dealers, LPL Financial. At some point
on Friday, LPL's 15,000 advisors were no longer able to access its Charlotte, N.C.-based data
center, causing much of the firm's technology platform to become unusable. As the outage unfolded,
the company's phone systems were unable to keep up with demand, leaving many LPL-affiliated
advisors in the dark.
https://t.co/FrbXqKGyxZ
1
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

EE down: 4G outage leaves thousands of customers without service across UK
BT-owned mobile operator EE recently experienced an outage with its 4G mobile data coverage.
The outage affected thousands of customers across the UK. The 4G service blackout, identified by
EE as a “data issue,” affected customers in London, Birmingham, Streatham, Manchester, Leicester,
Leeds, Sheffield, Hull, Glasgow, and Nottingham.
https://t.co/3X3AobStFc
Starbucks computers crash in widespread outage
Large parts of the United States and Canada were impacted by a coffee shortage as a result of a
crash to Starbucks's computer systems in mid-May. The caffeine crisis began on a Tuesday morning
and as of mid-afternoon remained unresolved. The company acknowledged the problem, saying it
was the result of troubles with a software update, not hacking. A Starbucks spokesperson said the
problem came about as a result of a "technology update" to store registers and that a limited number
of the country's 14,000 North American locations were affected.
https://t.co/6FlBCmYo7m
Orlando airport shuttle debacle was crash of history, glitches and surprise
Recent malfunctions with Orlando International Airport’s new shuttle provoked astonishment that a
broken train could trigger such a debacle for which there was no immediate rescue plan. The
episode was one of the most severe growth pains ever suffered at the airport, which is the nation’s
14th busiest and is amid a daunting, $3.1 billion expansion in gates, trains and garage space.
https://t.co/kkplGeKMn1
Yahoo’s Bob Lord said massive data breach felt like Vertigo
Being the chief information security officer at the company that’s suffered the biggest (known) data
breaches in history isn’t the kind of fame most CISOs would be looking for. But it’s Yahoo’s Bob
Lord’s bag. Last fall, Yahoo revealed that a state-sponsored hack had affected at least 500 million
accounts, with (as it turned out) the information stolen at least as early as January 2014 and utilized
until at least December 2016. The news of that huge hack was topped a few months later when
Yahoo also revealed it had suffered an even more massive hack in August 2013 of more than one
billion user accounts.
https://t.co/6gyRsrUova
An Interesting Tidbit: Dinosaur asteroid hit 'worst possible place'
Scientists who drilled into the impact crater associated with the demise of the dinosaurs summarise
their findings so far in a BBC Two documentary. The researchers recovered rocks from under the
Gulf of Mexico that were hit by an asteroid 66 million years ago. The nature of this material records
the details of the event. It is becoming clear that the 15km-wide asteroid could not have hit a worse
place on Earth. The shallow sea covering the target site meant colossal volumes of sulphur (from the
mineral gypsum) were injected into the atmosphere, extending the "global winter" period that
followed the immediate firestorm. Had the asteroid struck a different location, the outcome might
have been very different.
https://t.co/gxLZ4ATDsM
2
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Is Microsoft to blame for the largest ransomware attacks in internet history?
May 2017 saw the largest global ransomware attack in internet history, and the world did not handle
it well. We’re only beginning to calculate the damage inflicted by the WannaCry program; but at the
same time, we’re also calculating blame. There’s a long list of parties responsible, including the
criminals, the NSA, and the victims themselves — but the most controversial has been Microsoft
itself. The attack exploited a Windows networking protocol to spread within networks; and while
Microsoft released a patch nearly two months ago, it’s become painfully clear that patch didn’t reach
all users. Microsoft was following the best practices for security and still left hundreds of thousands
of computers vulnerable, with dire consequences. Was it good enough?
https://t.co/NY5yGXvohM
Digest Oldie but Goodie: "The Alaska Permanent Fund and the $38 Billion Keystroke"
Do you ever have that sinking feeling just before you depress the delete key? Am I deleting the
correct file? Can I recover it if I’m wrong? An employee of the Alaska Department of Revenue
perhaps should have thought twice before acting. While maintaining a system that distributed oil
revenues to Alaskans, he made one fateful keystroke that totally wiped out an account worth $38
billion – and its backup!
http://bit.ly/2r99kav
U.K. Health Service Ignored Warnings for Months
Britain’s National Health Service ignored numerous warnings over the last year that many of its
computer systems were outdated and unprotected from the type of devastating cyberattack it
suffered in May. Many of the N.H.S. computers still run Windows XP, an out-of-date software that no
longer gets security updates from its maker, Microsoft. A government contract with Microsoft to
update the software for the N.H.S. expired two years ago.
https://t.co/Wmi03lMrLO
Microsoft issues ‘highly unusual’ Windows XP patch to prevent massive ransomware
attack
UK hospitals, Telefonica, FedEx, and other businesses were hit by a a massive ransomware attack
in May. Around 75,000 computers in 99 countries were affected. The malware was able to spread
thanks to flaws in old versions of Windows. While Microsoft quickly issued fixes for the latest
versions of Windows last month, this left Windows XP unprotected. Many of the machines attacked
were breached simply because the latest Windows updates had not been applied quickly enough,
but there were still organizations that continue to run Windows XP despite the risks. Microsoft is now
taking what it describes as a “highly unusual” step to provide public patches for Windows operating
systems that are in custom support only. This includes specific fixes for Windows XP, Windows 8,
and Windows Server 2003.
https://t.co/dJpfGOwsz8
Cyber attack: RBI asks banks to shut down ATMs till software is updated
In May, the RBI (Reserver Bank of India) directed banks to operate their ATMs only after the
installed computer systems received a special Windows update to protect them from a malware
impacting systems across the world. This directive came in the wake of global system outages due
to WannaCry ransomware.
https://t.co/AfxNh5rG7a
3
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Solar Mini-Grids Could Shield The U.S. From Terrorist Strikes
The diversification of energy sources that feed the American electric grid should be a national
security priority to ensure a robust national grid system that can withstand natural disasters and
terrorist attacks on U.S. infrastructure. But according to a new paper by the Michigan Technological
University (MTU), that’s not enough. The experts said that building resilience to cascading blackouts,
attacks from hostile foreign entities and other grid-threatening events requires the wide-scale
development of solar resources while creating independently functioning micro-grids that will retain
their ability to produce power in case of a mass outage. And the American military concurs.
https://t.co/f7NopyNzWJ
NHS hack part of huge global attack that has crippled 36,000 machines
A global cyber-attack using hacking tools widely believed to have been developed by the US
National Security Agency and leaked online by a group called the Shadow Brokers caused chaos
around the world in May. British hospitals, the Russian government, German railways and big
companies like FedEx were among those affected when they were crippled by the 'ransomware' that
rapidly spread across the globe and infected 75,000 computers in 99 countries.
https://t.co/ASjM4eBkcb
There's a Massive Ransomware Attack Spreading Globally Right Now
In May, a ransomware attack quickly spread across the globe and rendered vital systems
inaccessible. “In less than 3 hours (even can say less than 2 hours if we count it from the explosion),
victims already were found in 11 countries.” Approximately 6 hours later, Kaspersky Lab reported
more than 45,000 attacks in 74 countries.
https://t.co/M82jPEJS3W
San Francisco, Los Angeles Outages Highlight Growing Risks, Rising Costs of Aging
Power Infrastructure
San Franciscans and Los Angelenos alike suffered through major power failures in April. Given
California’s national and world leading role in fostering deployment of a new generation of distributed
solar, renewable energy, energy storage and smart grid technologies, some may be tempted to use
the Los Angeles (LA) and San Francisco (SF) grid failures to highlight the high risk and potential
costs of aggressively pursuing such a proactive new power and energy market reform agenda.
They’d be mistaken in doing so. Rather, the SF and LA power grid outages were the result of “run of
the mill” equipment failures that have been responsible for bringing down electricity grids since the
dawn of the industry.
https://t.co/NFQXqNPibu
Chase outage knocks out payments service for customers nationwide
JPMorgan Chase customers nationwide on Thursday 11 May were prevented from making online
and mobile payments due to unspecified technology issues. Services including bill pay and Chase
QuickPay — the company’s peer-to-peer payment service — went down around 4 p.m. and were
restored around 8:30 p.m.
https://t.co/F6OCH9LvKF
4
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

At least 16 hospitals now completely offline after huge hack
A huge cyber-attack infected NHS trusts across the U.K. in May and led to all digital systems being
pulled down. The ransomware threatened hospitals that they would lose access to patient records
and other files if they didn’t pay money to the hackers. The attack used the Wanna Decryptor variant
of malware, which holds affected computers hostage while the attackers demand a ransom.
https://t.co/9FV46rdpFv
Digest Oldie but Goodie: "The Cost of RPO and RTO"
The purpose of availability analysis is to determine how to limit downtime and data loss. Both cost a
corporation money and reputation. But improving them also costs money. Improvement generally
means adding redundancy to the corporate systems. How does one balance the cost of availability
improvement against the savings of reduced downtime and lost data?
https://t.co/lNMnnk3po1
IBM Bolsters Disaster Recovery with GDR For IBM i
In June, IBM plans to start selling a new disaster recovery product to IBM i shops. Called
Geographically Dispersed Resiliency, or GDR, the new offering is designed to give companies an
easy and affordable way to recover production IBM i LPARs on remote machines.
https://t.co/qNft6sLDK9
New Mirai-like threat, dubbed Persirai, targeting online IP cameras, warns Trend Micro
A new Internet of Things (IoT) threat has been uncovered by security firm Trend Micro. Dubbed
Persirai, it has reportedly been infecting particular Chinese-made wireless cameras for around a
month. The Mirai-like threat, which is said to have infected 120,000 IP cameras so far,
exploits flaws in the cameras. What's more, owners of affected cameras are unlikely to know that
they have been affected.
https://t.co/QUlfeA5any
Karachi plunges into darkness as Bin Qasim power plant trips
A large part of localities plunged into darkness on a Tuesday night in May as a major fault occurred
at the Bin Qasim electric power plant. Power distribution in five districts of the city was adversely
affected as result of the tripping, causing power outage for hours. The power utility failed to restore
