IP(R1) IP(R2)
uses Router R1 as its master and Router R2 as its
IP(V1) IP(V2)
backup.AnothervirtualrouterV2isconfiguredwithIP
address IP(V2). This virtual router uses Router R2 as
backup VirtualRouter(V2) master
itsmasterandRouterR1asitsbackup.
The hosts on the LAN are split between these virtual master VirtualRouter(V1) backup
routers. Some hosts are configured to use virtual
router V1 and send their traffic to IP address IP(V1). IP(V1) IP(V2)
LAN
The other hosts are configured to use virtual router
V2andsendtheirtraffictoIPaddressIP(V2).
In normal operation, Router V1 forwards all traffic
addressed to IP(V1); and Router V2 forwards all
traffic addressed to IP(V2). However, should a router
fail,itstrafficishandledbyitsbackuprouter. VRRPLoadSharing
Anadditionaladvantageofrouterload-sharingisthatthereisnoidlebackuprouterthatmayhave
suffered an undetected problem and is therefore not operational. The failure of a backup router
maynotbediscovereduntilafailoverisrequired,leadingtoadownedsystem.Sinceallroutersin
a load-sharing virtualized router are being used, it is known that they are all operational. This is
similar to active/active systems, in which all processing nodes are being actively used and are
knowntobeavailableiftheyhavetoassumetheloadofafailedprocessingnode.
This configuration can be extended to many routers and many virtual networks. Of course, a
backup router must be configured with a capacity that will allow it to handle its own
communication load plus that of the master that it is backing up. Alternatively, there must be
somestrategytoshednoncriticalloadintheeventofarouterfailure.
OtherConfigurations
A VRRP virtual router may be configured in other ways. For instance, one backup router might
protect many primary routers (N:1); or many backup routers might cooperate in protecting many
primaryrouters(N:M).
Inaddition,asingleVRRProutercanbeconfiguredtoprotectmanyIPaddresses.
How Does VRRP Work?
VRRP is a protocol that enables the creation of redundancy between two or more routers. VRRP
controls its master/backup configuration via the multicast of IP advertising messages from the
4
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

currentmaster tothebackuprouter(s) inthe virtualrouter.Exceptfor receiving andanalyzingthe
advertisements,abackuprouterispassiveunlessitmusttakeoverthemasterrole.
TheIPContainer
The IP header used to address the VRRP virtual router by a client uses the standard IP header
format4 with one restriction. The TTL (Time to Live) field in the IP header is used to limit the
number of hops that apacketcan takethrough the network. Itis decremented witheach hop and
is discarded should it reach zero. For instance, a TTL value of sixteen will limit a packet’s life to
sixteen hops through the network. This prevents a packet from circulating endlessly in a network
withinadvertentloops.
A packet sent by a client to a VRRP virtual router must have a TTL value of 255 (its maximum
value). Since VRRP virtual routers are only used as first-hop routers in a network, the receipt of
anyIPmessagewithaTTLvaluelessthan255willbediscardedbecauseithastakenotherhops
beforearrivingatthevirtualrouter.Inadditiontocompensatingfornetworkmisconfigurations,this
has the added advantage of preventing some types of hacker attacks since the attack packets, if
not originated locally on the router’s LAN, will have gone through one or more hops before
reachingthevirtualrouterandwillbediscarded.
Using a TTL value of 255 has the disadvantage that a VRRP packet inadvertently sent to the
network by a faulty router may circulate for a long time in the network. However, the developers
of VRRP felt that it was more important to protect against hackers than it was to protect against
faultyrouterconfigurations.
VRRPAdvertisements
If the Protocol field in the IP header is equal to 112, the contents of the IP packet is a VRRP
multicast advertisement message. Its fields contain the following information relevant to this brief
description:5
 Priority is the rank in the election process for the VRRP routers and determines which
router will be the master router. Priority values range from 1 to 254. Priority values of 0
and 255 have special meaning. The owning router always has priority 255 and is master
if it is operational. A master router (owner or not) will change its priority to 0 if it is
relinquishingmasterstatustooneofitsbackuprouters.
 Authentication may be none, may require only a simple clear-text password, or may
requirestrongauthentication.
 Advertisement Interval is the time in seconds between advertisements multicast by the
masterrouter.Itsdefaultvalueisonesecond.
 IPAddressesaretheoneormoreaddressesprotectedbythevirtualrouter.
Furthermore,thesourceanddestinationfieldsintheIPheaderhavespecifiedmeanings:
 IPSourceAddressistheprimaryIPaddressoftheroutersendingthepacket.
 IP Destination Address is always 224.0.0.18, the multicast address assigned to VRRP
packets.
4W.R.Stevens,Chapter3,IP:InternetProtocol,TCP/IPIllustrated:Volume1–TheProtocols,Addison-Wesley;1994.
5A.Srikanth,A.A.Onart,Chapter3,VRRPMessages,VRRP:IncreasingReliabilityandFailoverwiththeVirtualRouter
RedundancyProtocol,PearsonEducation,Inc.;2003.
5
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

TheAdvertisementProcess
Failover
Once every advertising interval, the master router multicasts an advertisement containing its
priority. All other routers in the virtual router group (the backup routers) receive and analyze this
advertisement.Theytakenootheractionunlessafailoveriscalledfor.
If no advertisement is received from the master within three advertisement intervals (typically
three seconds), the master is deemed to have failed. Each backup router will prepare itself to
broadcast an advertisement telling the other routers that it is taking over the role of master.
However, each backup router will delay its advertisement by an interval inversely proportional to
its priority (with the lowest priority router, priority 1, delaying for an advertisement interval). Thus,
the highest priority router will respond first and will become master. The other routers will note
that a higher priority router than itself has taken over the master role and will remain backup
routers.
Another failover trigger occurs when the current master sends an advertisement with a priority of
zero. This signals the backup routers that a failover is to occur immediately. As with a missing
advertisement, the backup router with the highest priority will respond with its advertisement first
andwillbecomethenewmaster.
Recovery
When a router is returned to service, it returns initially as a backup router and monitors
advertisements from the master router. When it receives the next advertisement, it determines
whetheritshouldbecomethenewmaster.
If the restored router is the owner (priority255), it preemptsmaster status bymulticasting its own
advertisement. The current master (the incumbent) will receive the advertisement and will
relinquishmasterstatustotheowner.
As described earlier, if the current master is the owner, the newly restored router will take no
actionandwillremainabackuprouter.
If neither the incumbent nor the new contestant is the owner, the resulting action depends upon
whether preemption has or has not been allowed in the router configuration. If it has not been
allowed, no change in status takes place. However, if preemption has been allowed, the
contestantwilltakeovermasterstatusfromtheincumbentifithasahigherpriority.
NetworkManagement
A VRRP virtual router is configured and maintained via SNMP (Simple Network Management
Protocol). It uses a MIB (Management Information Base) that has been standardized by an IETF
RFC (the Internet Engineering Task Force sets standards for the Internet via Request for
Commentstandards).
Standardization
The VRRP standards being set by the IETF are still in draft form. The current RFC for VRRP is
VirtualRouterRedundancyProtocol(VRRP)RFC3768.
However,implementationsofthedraftstandardareavailableinproductstoday.
6
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

VRRP Product Availability
VRRP is available from several router providers, including Cisco, Nortel, and Force 10. A Linux
versionisofferedbyRedHataspartofitsClusterSuite.
VRRPis similar toHSRP(HotStandbyRouter Protocol),aproprietaryCiscoprotocol.Theremay
besomepatentinfringementissuestoberesolved.
The Definitive VRRP Reference
The definitive book on VRRP is VRRP: Increasing Reliability and Failover with the Virtual Router
Redundancy Protocol, authored by Ayikudy Srikanth and Adnan Adam Onart.6 In addition to a
clear description of the inner workings of VRRP with UML diagrams, SDL diagrams, and logical
symbolism,thebookdelvesintothedetailsoftheVRRPpacketstructureandtheMIBstructure.
It discusses the implementation of VRRP over network technologies other than IP. They include
Ethernet,FDDI,TokenRing,andATM.ItalsodescribestheconsiderationstobeusedwithVRRP
inenvironmentsusingfirewallsandVPNtunnels.
The book deals extensively with the management of VRRP virtual routers with SNMP and
demonstrates this with examples of the Command Line Interface (CLI) and GUI interfaces
providedbyHPOpenviewandNortelNetworks.
It describes in detail Cisco’s equivalent proprietary protocol HSRP and compares its features to
those of VRRP. It looks at the future of VRRP, including its support for IPv6 and extensions for
higher availability.Theseextensions includetheabilityof arouter toshutdownif itloses itsWAN
connection so that failover to a redundant WAN link serviced by a backup router can be made.
Other topics include firewall synchronization, server load balancing, mobile IP, and preservation
ofstateduringfailover.
Appendices include a detailed (100 page) review of TCP/IP, the MIB structure, and open source
VRRP. Detailed descriptions of the VRRP protocol are provided via SDL flowcharts, logical
pseudocode,andUMLdiagrams.
The authors are uniquely qualified to write such a book. Ayikudy Srikanth is a member of the
IETF VRRP working group. He was the architect of the Nortel Bay series VRRP router and was
the manager of the team that implemented it. He holds two VRRP-related patents. Adnan Adam
Onart managed the implementation of the VRRP and early high-availability strategy for Nortel.
Priortothat,hehadbeenDirectorofInternetworkingSoftwareatFujitsu-Nexion.
6PearsonEducation,Inc.;2003.
7
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

