Bank-Verlag – An Update
August2010
WolfgangBreidbachandhiscolleaguesmaywellbethefathersofactive/activesystems.Atleast,
wedon’tknowofanyearlieractive/activesystem.Equallyinterestingisthatthedrivingmotivation
for this early active/active system was not only high availability. It was also zero downtime
migration.
In an earlier article,1 we described Bank-Verlag’s system as using transaction replication. In a
recent, interesting discussion on the Defining Active/Active thread of our LinkedIn Continuous
AvailabilityForum,Wolfgangprovidedsignificantadditionaldetailabouthisapproach.
Hereishisupdatedstory.
Bank-Verlag and the Debit Card
Bank-Verlag is a subsidiary of an association of over 300 German banks, including Deutsche
Bank and all other large banks in Germany. It was established in 1961 to be the publishing arm
for the association and published a banking magazine that was distributed to the association’s
memberbanks.
In1985,theassociation directedBank-Verlagtostart anelectronic bankingservicefor its smaller
memberbanks.WolfgangwashiredasBank-Verlag’sfirstITemployee.
His first task was to provide online banking services and debit-card production for these banks.
He was giventheuse of an IBM System 370ina data center of one of theassociation’s banks to
implementtheservices.
The debit-card service involved creating cards based on a bank account. Money within a daily
limitcouldbedrawnonceadayfromanATM.TheATMtransactionwasbookedagainstthebank
accountafterwards. Everythingneededwasencodedineachdebitcard’smagneticstripe.
As a customer used a card, the date of the last transaction was recorded in the card’s magnetic
stripe. There was no online tracking of the transactions by a central system. After all, why would
thisbenecessary?Thecardtoldall.
1BankVerlag–TheActive/ActivePioneer,AvailabilityDigest;December2006.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/private/0103/bank_verlag.pdf
1
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

The TV Exposé
Until one fateful day in 1986. Bank-Verlag’s management was stunned to learn from a TV
investigative report that people were using debit cards fraudulently. The scheme was quite
straightforward.
The fraud was initiated by stealing a debit card and by somehow managing to get its PIN. The
PIN was obtained perhaps by looking over the owner’s shoulder or because the owner had kept
thePINtogetherwithhiscard.Atthattime,peoplewerenotfamiliarwithalltherisks.
The thieves simply purchased readily available equipment to read and write card magnetic
stripes. They read and wrote down the data in the stripes of the stolen debit cards, including the
dates of the last transactions. Theythen withdrew moneyfrom ATMs within the daily limits of the
cards and later rewrote the magnetic stripe of each debit card with the old data, especially the
date of the last transaction. In this way, they easily could exceed the cards’ daily limits. They
could use the cards over and over again, and the banks were never the wiser. It took a TV
reportertouncoverthefraud.
As a result, Bank-Verlag was ordered by the banking association to build a central authorization
system for the banks’ debit cards. Wolfgang and his colleges immediately set to work to do just
that, again using a data center IBM 370 for the authorization task. The authorization system was
front-ended by an IBM Series 1 system as a communication subsystem. They were able to
implement this application in a very short time, and the system went into service later that same
year.
Using this new system, ATMs reported in real time the contents of the magnetic stripe to the
authorization system, which validated the data and returned the data to be recorded by the ATM
onthestripe.Nolongercouldonefraudulentlymodifythedataonthestripe.
Of course, if the system were down, no one could withdraw cash using a debit card. However, at
thattime,ATMswerenotsopopular.Thus,thiswasnotdeemedtobeabigproblem.
Enter Tandem
Shortly after the new authorization system came online, Deutsche Bank acquired the bank that
owned the data center being used by Bank-Verlag. Deutsche Bank closed down that bank’s data
center, and Bank-Verlag’s processing operations were moved to a Deutsche Bank data center.
This did not sit well for competitive reasons with the other banks in the association, and they
authorizedBank-Verlagtoopenitsowndatacenter.
Bank-Verlag now had the opportunity to revisit its choice of data-processing systems. It
investigated several high-availability systems, including those of Nixdorf and Siemans. However,
Bank-Verlag had close relations with Banksys, a financial transaction routing service located in
Brussels,whichwasusingalittle-knownsystemfromTandemComputers.
What impressed Bank-Verlag was that while the providers of the other systems focused on the
number of 9s before the decimal point to describe their availability. Tandem focused on the
number of 9s after the decimal point. Other system vendors bragged that theycould achieve two
9s before the decimal point (99%). Tandem claimed that they could achieve two 9s after the
decimalpoint(99.99%).
Debit cards were becoming more and more popular, and the inconvenience of not being able to
use them because the authorization system was down was rapidly becoming a serious issue.
2
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

This was strongmotivation for Bank-VerlagtoselectahighlyreliableTandem system for thenew
authorizationsystem.
Furthermore, Banksys in Belgium had an application package that ran on Tandem and that did a
lot of what Bank-Verlag needed. That clinched the deal. Of course, Bank-Verlag’s staff had to
write additional applications, which they did in TAL and COBOL. Theyput their firstTandem VLX
intoservicein1988.
The Active/Active Inspiration
Now came the tough part. All of the debit-card authorization was still being done on the IBM
system, but Bank-Verlag had to move that processing to the Tandem system without denying
service to the debit-card holders. It did not want to do this as a “big bang” migration but rather as
acontrolled,incrementalmigration.Thuswasbornactive/active.
Toaccomplishthis,Wolfgang’sgroupmodifiedboththeIBMandtheTandem applicationssothat
each would send debit transactions that it had processed to the other system. Transactions were
interchanged as LU 6.2 messages, a protocol supported by both systems. The strategy was to
processeachtransactiononeachsystemsothatthesystemswouldremainsynchronized.
The group then copied the debit-card database from the IBM system to the Tandem system and
moved a few ATMs to the Tandem system. Data collisions were not a problem, as a debit card
could not be at two ATMs at the same time
(at least, legally). Now, any debit card
transaction executed on one system was
IBM 370 transactions alsoexecutedontheothersystem.
LU6.2
Tandem
As Bank-Verlag became comfortable with
VLX
the new system, it moved more ATMs to the
Tandem system until all had been moved.
Series1 Thisentiremigrationprocesstookonlyafew
days.TheIBMsystem was keptavailableas
ahotbackup.
Extending to Disaster Tolerance
ATMs ATMs In 1989, the growth in the use of debit cards
IsThistheWorld'sFirst was exploding; andtheauthorization system
Active/ActiveSystem?
needed to be expanded. In addition, Bank-
Verlag wanted to configure its system to be
geographically distributed in order to achieve a degree of disaster tolerance. Therefore, it
purchased an additional VLX and installed it about three kilometers from the original data center
(Germany is not plagued by hurricanes or earthquakes, so three kilometers was deemed to be a
safe separation distance). After the installation of this system, Bank-Verlag decommissioned the
IBMsystem.
Wolfgang and his group dusted off their active/active facility and brought it up to support the new
node. A problem that Bank-Verlag faced was that the LU 6.2 communications software licensed
from Tandem was veryexpensive. Bank-Verlagthereforerewrote the transaction-replicationlogic
to use SNA LU0 over X.21 leased lines instead. This communication technique was faster,
imposed less CPU overhead, and required no specially-licensed communication software from
Tandem.
3
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

The Growth of the System
As the years went by, the Tandem (then Compaq, then HP NonStop) systems grew to Cyclones,
thentoK-seriessystems,thentoS-seriessystems,andtodaytoNonStopIntegritysystems.
The conversion to S-series was particularly painful for two reasons. First, the S-series did not
support the X.21 communication controllers. The applications had to be rewritten to use the
SWAN controllers and TCP/IP, and all of the communication cables had to be changed and
rerouted. Secondly, the debit-card transaction volume had outgrown the capacity of the K-series
disks;andthetransitiontoS-seriesdiskshadtobemade.
Because of schedulingpressures,Wolfganghad toputintoproduction injust afew weeks abeta
version of the new application. It had not been thoroughly tested but ended up working well. He
hadscheduled a downtime window of 24 hours toreplacea node(hedid onenodeata time) but
wasabletocutoverin12to15hours.
Recently, Bank-Verlag upgraded from two six-
processor S-series (S86006 and S72006) to a
pair of four-processor Integrity NS16000s. This
time, no change in communication subsystems transactions
or disk systems was required (though Bank- NS16000 TCP/IP NS16000
VerlagmigratedS-diskstoIntegritydisks tosave 3km
maintenance charges); and the conversion went
smoothlywithnosignificantproblems.
As its systems upgraded, so did Bank-Verlag’s
responsibilities. It now acts as a financial
transaction gateway for debit and credit cards
issued by any bank. As a user requests services ATMs ATMs
at an ATM or makes a purchase at a retail store,
Bank-VerlagToday
his transaction must be authorized by the bank
thatissuedthecard.Insomecases,Bank-Verlagacts as theissuer.Inmostcases,however,the
transaction is routed by the Bank-Verlag system to the bank that issued the credit or debit card
for authorization. The acceptance or rejection of the transaction is then routed back to the
originating ATM or retail point-of-sale (POS) device to conclude the transaction. If the issuing
bank’s authorization system is down, Bank-Verlag can provide stand-in authorization until the
authorizationsystemisreturnedtoservice.
Achieving Availability and Scalability
The Bank-Verlag active/active infrastructure was developed long before the advent of
commercially available replication engines. Bank-Verlag therefore had to develop its own data-
replicationfacility.Rather thanreplicate each change as it is madeto thedatabase,atransaction
is totallyprocessedbyone of thenodes intheapplicationnetwork.Theresultingchanges for that
transactionarethensentasagrouptotheothernode.
TransactionReplication
Atransactioncanbesenttoeithernodeintheactive/activenetwork.Thatnode,whichwewillcall
the primarynode for the transaction, processes the entire transaction. In some cases, an ATM or
POS device will always send its transactions to the same node (if that node is up, otherwise to
4
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

the other node). In other cases, an ATM or POS device will round-robin its transactions to both
nodes,skippinganodeifitisdown.
Typically,processingbytheprimarynodeincludes:
1. Converting the transaction to the internal application message structure, including
decryption.
2. Preparing the transaction for internal processing, including PIN verification (if Bank-
Verlagisthecardissuer)orforrouting.
3. If the card was issued by another bank, re-encrypting the transaction and sending it to
theissuingbank.
4. Receivinganddecryptingtheresponsefromtheissuingbank.
5. Processingthetransactionrequestaccordingtotheauthorizationresponse.
6. EncryptingtheresponseandreturningittotheATMorPOSdevice.
At this point, the internal application message is sent to the other node, which we will call the
secondary node for the transaction. The secondary node performs only Step 5 above. Based on
the authorization response, the transaction message is processed; and the secondary database
isupdated.
Thus, each node has a current copy of the application database. A transaction can be sent to
either node, and it will be properly processed. Should a node fail, all that is required to maintain
service is to route all transactions to the surviving node. In over two decades of operation, Bank-
Verlaghasneverseenanoutageinthissystem.
Data-CollisionDetectionandResolution
It is possible, though highly unlikely, that a data collision can occur. After all, there is only one
copyofadebitorcreditcard;anditcannotbeusedintwoplacesatthesametime(thoughthisis
possiblewithonlinetransactions).Therefore,theapplicationprovidesdata-collisiondetection.Ifa
collision is detected, the result of the transaction’s primary node is accepted; and the results of
the secondary node are rejected. Fortunately, this situation has proven to be extremelyrare; and
suchtransactionsarereportedandscrutinizedverycarefullybyBank-Verlagstaff.
Zero-DowntimeUpgrades
Furthermore, since the nodes are looselycoupled bythe replication process, they do not have to
be the same. They can use different hardware and software. Keep in mind that the application
wasoriginallydevelopedwithonenodebeinganIBMsystemandtheothernodebeingaTandem
system.
This capability has proven to be important during the many system upgrades that Bank-Verlag
has performed.Itcanupgradeonenodetonewhardwareandsoftwareandthencanrunonboth
the old and the new nodes for a while to ensure that the new node is operating properly before
upgrading the second node. If it experiences a problem with the upgrade, it can fall back to the
old node until the problem is corrected. Years ago, for instance, Bank-Verlag moved from key-
sequenced Enscribe files to SQL. It upgraded one node to SQL and ran with a mixed system for
sixweeksasatrialwithnoproblemsbeforeupgradingtheothernodetoSQL.
Scalability
Thisinfrastructureisnotlimitedtotwonodes.Thesecondarynodedoesnothavetodoanyofthe
encryptionordecryption,anyofthecommunicationswithexternalauthorizationsystems,ormuch
oftheprocessing.Itisestimatedthatsecondaryprocessingonlyamountstoabout20%to30%of
5
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

theprimaryprocessingload.Therefore,thesystem isinherentlyscalable.Nodes canbeaddedto
carryadditionalloadwithouthavingtoincreasethesizeofanyofthenodes.Theonlychangethat
needs to be made to the application when a node is added is to include it in the replication of
transactions.
Bank-Verlag has recently completed the move of one of its data centers. To ensure continuous
availability during the move, it brought up a third node so that there would always be two
operating nodes as one node was moved to its new site. The move was eminently successful,
withnodowntimeexperiencedbythebank’susers.
Postscript
Bank-Verlag has since been reorganized. It is now a holding company managing two operating
companies:
 BVMediacontinuestobethepublishingarmoftheassociationbanks.
 BV Payment Systems provides banking services, card authorization, and secure PIN
lettersfortheassociationbanks(asecurePINletteris atamper-proofletterusedtonotify
customersofPINsfortheirdebitcards).
BV Payment Systems runs NonStop servers as well as several UNIX-based IBM systems.
Wolfgang is now the Director of NonStop Systems for BV Payment Systems. His new
applicationshaveleftTALandCOBOLfarbehindandarewritteninC,C++andJava.
LookingatthehistoryofBank-Verlag,onehastobeimpressedwiththespeedandefficiencythat
characterized many of its migrations. Wolfgang attributes this in great part to the fact that Bank-
Verlagremainsafairlysmallcompany.Thisgivesitanagilitydifficulttofindinlargercompanies.
Are Wolfgang and his colleagues really the fathers of active/active systems? They certainly are
pioneers in these architectures. There is a quaint American saying that “You can always tell a
pioneer – he is the one with the arrows in his back.” Wolfgang and his colleagues have escaped
the arrows, but they are still the earliest active/active pioneers of whom we know. If anyone
readingthisknowsofanearlier pioneer,pleaseinformusattheAvailabilityDigestsothatwecan
chroniclethatexperience.
6
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com