as this quantityincreases bypercent, we allsitback deluded bythe appearance of improvement,
basking in the glory of our diagnostic prowess. Sometimes the graph of tape unit performance
shows99.9%availability.ItsoundslikeaRussianelection;andinasenseitis,asIshallexplain.
How come that in a week of superb equipment "availability,” it is possible for our applications
people to curse your very bones for causing them daily delays in schedule? Are they getting at
the wrongguy? Itdoesn'tseem justice,does it? But,the waywereportthings today, it is onlytoo
possible. Yousee,ina week of "highavailability,” itisn'tthe totallengthof down timethatcauses
the trouble, it is the frequency. If a tape unit goes down, I don't really care how long it is down,
provided the others continue to function. If it's down, get it out of the way; and don't bring it back
until you can guaranteeit. So itcan well happenthat "availability" is down butWorsingis "happy"
-Iputthatinquotes,too,youunderstand.
What causes the trouble is the eye blink downtime in the middle of the two-hour run. The eye
blinks don't integrate into anything displayable in charts each week, but the consequent reruns
canadduptodisaster.Sothetrueavailabilityistotaltime,minusrerunanddelaytime.That'sthe
wayyoushouldreallybejudged.
There are some complications, of course. You can complain that if you luck out, the eye blinks
will occur in two-minute runs so that total rerun and delay time is not the measure. Perhaps
frequencyisabettermeasure.
Then again, it is difficult to obtain some of the numbers. Tape parity errors, for instance, to state
the richest source of our displeasure. I will be dealing with this problem in detail at the end of my
talk.
Whether you can see all the answers or not, at least I hope that you can see the need for
reliabilityandtheneed,accurately,toportrayavailability.
2
F.G.(Buck)RodgersledtheIBMDataProcessingDivisionfromOctober1967toOctober1970,whenhebecameIBM
directorandlatervicepresidentofmarketing.RodgersjoinedIBMin1950andretiredinJuly1984.
5
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

On Engineering Changes
[Editor:Thinksoftware.]
Now I come to the thorny subject of engineering changes. Engineering changes are regarded as
necessary for four reasons, namely: capability, error-correction, reliability, and serviceability. I'll
takeeachinturn.
As far as capability is concerned, and I take this basically to mean speed, I am not interested.
Don't waste computer time speeding up the circuitry. I ordered the machines according to a
schedule of speed specifications, and I'm content with that. The only exception to that general
rule is where you have a design mistake, and the machine has timing troubles. Of course, you
havetofixthat;butthatcomesundererror-correction.
If you want to speed things up significantly, put all the ECs on in the factory, give the machine a
newname,andreplacetheonein-house.ThenI'mneverdown.
Regarding error-corrections, these, of course, have to be made; and if they are few in number,
please install them promptly. If they are not few in number, then I am the possessor of a citrus
fruit; and I want neither peel nor pip of it. Get it out after you've got its replacement up and
running,anddon'thavetheeffronterytoaskforanyrent.
I think byfar the greatest EC activityis in the realm of reliability. I think you can always find ways
of making the machine more rugged. When you build a new model, you like to use the most
advanced technology available, consistent with cost and risk. And by definition, this means
technology untried in the field. And, in turn, this implies a more than marginal propensity for
trouble,particularlyintheearlystages.
It goes without saying, then, that reliability improvements are going to be rife in the first year to
anymodel.We have seen this quite dramaticallyin the case of the model 75.When it first hit the
floor it was, frankly, a totally useless machine. Its central circuitry was just not up to the task
requiredof it. Butsincethe repopulationinMarch, ithas becomeperhaps thebestof allthe360s
despiteits speed.Again, in thecase of the91, you threwsome$24million worth of parts into the
Hudson-that'saprettyexpensiveformofpollutionbytheway-forthesamereason.
But when should the stream of reliability EC's begin to dry up? I ask this not as a rhetorical
question but for understanding. I really don't know, and I think a frank statement of IBM's goals
andexpectationswithrespecttothe360isaboutdue.Thebigmachineshavebeenoutforovera
yearnow,andIthinkIBMshouldknowenoughtobeabletotellus.
When you design a machine for a new technology, you don't know what the problems are going
to be; so you don't know what troubles you are going to have fixing the problems; hence, the
fourth type of engineering, change for serviceability. If the only way to change the [printer]
hammers is to hang upside down on a rope from a pulley in the ceiling, then you obviously have
toinstallanEC,i.e.,youhavetostrengthentheceiling.
Serviceability means more diagnostics in the allotted preventive maintenance period and less
timeneededtolocateandrepairfaults.Solet'shaveserviceabilityengineeringchanges.
HavingcoveredthereasonsforECs,Inowwanttomentionthevexedproblemsofschedulingthe
time needed to install them. What are the premises? Certainly, if the need for improvement is
recognized, the improvement should be incorporated. But if the machine has been working
reasonablywellsincetheneedwasrecognized,onemoredaywon'tdoitanyharm.
Parenthetically,ifithasn'tbeenworkingwell,thentheECisnotregardedassuchbutaspartofa
program to get the machine up and running. Furthermore, it takes time to install changes; and I
6
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

don't want to use more time in installation than I save by installation. And I want preventive
maintenance time taken entirely for preventive maintenance. I can only allow EC installation
provided the standard crew performs its normal procedures without any interference. In addition,
ECs, by their very nature, change the machine to something different; and the consequences of
this cannot be predicted with complete accuracy. Therefore, I cannot be certain that the machine
willrecoverfromthetrauma.
This is a pretty formidable set of conditions and restraints, and I have no formula for success.
WhatIthinkIwouldprefertodoisgiveme:
a. A plan of philosophy and expectations for each machine, updated as experience is
acquired.
b.AstatementoftherisksinvolvedinallowingECstoaccumulate.
c.AgeneralplanforacquiringthetimetoinstallthemainbulkoftheECs,and
d. A coordinated schedule for the installation of ECs requiring lengthy installation or having
highprobabilityofcausingsubsequentmorningsickness.
On Preventive Maintenance
That concludes all I have to sayconcerning engineering changes and leads me to the next topic,
thatofpreventivemaintenance.
I understand the need for preventive maintenance and am happy to schedule a period each day
for its execution. This is supposed to purchase my ticket to perfection, reliability, availability, and
all stations to happiness. What you do with your preventive maintenance time is not regarded as
anyaffair ofmine.Iputon mywalkingshoes,andIsneak pastsquads of engineers armedtothe
teeth with ring binders and scopes; but I never intrude. And if all were well, I'd stay clear out of
theway.Butitisn't.Howmanytimesdoesadevicethathasbeenrunningperfectlyallweek,crop
out within the first hour of preventive maintenance on Friday? And not just trivial devices, either.
How often has the two-hour preventive maintenance period been followed by a four-hour post-
p.m.recoverysession?
Now, I'm the first to admit the existence of Heisenberg’s [Uncertainty] Principle: You can't
measure the temperature of the bath water without changing it, and I suppose you can't test
equipment without imposing some strain on it. But sometimes I think you're too brutal. You seem
tosplitthepatient'sheadtofindoutifhehasanybrains.
But itseems computers aredesignedfor smoothrunning, notfor diagnosing. Perhaps weneed a
diagnostic-oriented computer.We already have primitive diagnostic circuitry in some of the 360s.
Perhaps this is the first step towards the fail-softness you keep telling me is just around the
corner.
But today I get the very definite feeling: a) that the machine hates being tampered with and, b)
thatyourtechniquesaren'tsufficientlyscientificorcomprehensive.
Whyshould wehavebetter diagnostic programs thanyou?But wehave. By your ownadmission,
there's no better diagnostic than a production program; but you can have a copy of that program
any time you like. You have access to everything we've got, plus your own staff, so really there's
no excuse for handing over the machines to us without a guarantee of current perfection, is
there?
Whatis haunting both of us,Ithink - andhereI find myself banded with you againstour common
enemy, the Poughkeepsie Business Machine Company - is that with today's machines, it is very
7
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

difficult to tell sometimes whether the machine is up or not. Tapes may be spinning, messages
franticallytyping themselves on the first generation console typewriter - they're so cryptic anyway
as to be indistinguishable from random sequences, lights flashing, yet nothing but chaos being
created. Another way of expressing this, perhaps, is that production work looks pretty chaotic.
We're OK when we get a hard stop. All systems are stopped, we fill out a card, hand it to the
C.E.'s, and go off for a smoke. But IBM has invented a thing that I hereby name the "soft stop.”
It's dead but gives all impressions of being alive - like some people I know. It takes very clever
operators,assistedbyknowledgeablesoftwarepeopleoften,toissuethedeathcertificate.
What's it going to be like with multiprogramming? Have you considered this problem in the
multiprogrammingenvironment?
My mind boggles at the contemplation of the interaction of coexistent programs on a soft
machine. Are you equal to the task? Or are you going to be a reincarnation of the Grand Old
DukeofYork?3
Well, to summarize mythoughts on preventive maintenance, I will merely repeat that I'm in favor
of it; but I feel that there is still plentyof scope and requirements for improvements in your use of
thetime.
On The IBM 360
Mylastsubtitleis whatIthink ofthe360.This,ofcourse,isreallyaspeechinitsownright.Idon't
havetimetogivemorethanabriefsummaryheretoday.
Firstly, I think it is appropriate to state my reasons for choosing the 360 in the first place. We
chose it for its peripherals. Peripherals are the key to data processing, not mainframes. I should
pointoutherethatIdonot regardthe360asacomputer;andforthatreason,wedonotuseitas
such. We do our computing, our arithmetic that is, on the machine of another vendor. The 360
has ashort word-length. Itis ahexadecimalmachinethatmakes iteffectivelyevenshorter,andit
does not have floating-point round. You can saythat the model 91 commits round-off error faster
than anything on the face of the earth, while the first lecture in the introductory course of any
Numerical Analysis Program states that this is the fundamental problem of computation and the
sourceofallevil.
ItisoneofthecuriousmysteriesofIBM,theomissionofroundinginthe360.Itwouldbelessofa
mystery if IBM were to come right out and say that the 360 is intended for data processing and
notforcomputing.
However, back to the mainframe theme. Data processing is essentially the business of obtaining
correct bits, storing them on something for periods of time, and being able to read them from
storage whenever I like. Questions of language and speed are secondary. The question of
reliability,asyouknowbynow,istheprimaryone.
As you also probably know, the most unreliable device in data processing is the conventional
half-inch magnetic tape. This has caused The Boeing Company's Commercial Airplane Division
more trouble by an order of magnitude than anything else. It suffers from problems of
environment (dust particles), electronics (it is highly analog rather than digital), mechanical wear
(oxide on the tape), mechanical obstinacy (reels spinning in opposite directions). Half-inch
magnetic tape, even today, is a Rube Goldberg device, very little removed from the string-and-
pulley device of fifteen years ago. Yet we continue to commit the invaluable information of the
companytoitsruggedsurface.Youmightjustaswellputtoseainasieve!
3 A reference to a children’s rhyme about the Duke of York. When his army was halfway up the hill, he didn’t know
whethertheywereupordown.
8
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Sothat was the firstproblem tosolve.Wehadto get off theconventional half-inchmagnetic tape
ontosomesortoftwentiethcenturydevice.Andifthiswereallweachievedbygoing360,itwould
stillbeasignificantimprovementtothebusinessofdesigningandbuildingairplanes.
[Editor: At this point, Dr. Worsing goes into a long diatribe about trying to find a readily-
available data storage device to replace magnetic tape and his failed attempts to try to
use the new tape cartridges called “hypertape.” He concludes with a reference to
Boeing’s early attempt to use IBM’s Data Cell Drive, which could provide a system with
threegigabytesofdiskstorage.]
In time, we will know how to use this rich array of devices. It will no longer be necessary to
prescribeleechesforeveryailment;instead,we'llletthepunishmentfitthecrime.
We'll know enough about the economics.We hope we'll be able to find out how manyto order of
a particular device to ensure the availability of one. We hope that our programmers will have
mastered the subtleties of Job Control Language. But when the day of revelation dawns, please
don't announce System/7.2832, the 9-bit bytes, PL/2, Supertape, Dinky Disk, Data Jail,
excommunication devices and voice input - however trivial the conversion. We have enough to
keep us busy for the next decade, and all we need from the manufacturer is unprecedented
availability. You, the purveyors of availability, are now in the forefront of the struggle to make this
vast complex of possibilities a viable, economic reality. I am sure you are equal to the challenge,
andIamconfidentofyourcontinuingabilitytoensureitseventualsuccess.
In Conclusion
I thank you deeply for the opportunity of conveying these thoughts, impressions, criticisms,
questions and aspirations that I hope have been taken in the spirit given and would be happy to
engageinvigorousdebateordiscussionifthereareanyquestionsfrom yourside.
9
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

