With no electricity or network, Tamil Nadu’s cashless economy continues to struggle
Radha Manalan, a media entrepreneur from Chennai, had gone cashless over the last month.
Judiciously using cash only when required, he was coping fine with demonetisation — until Cyclone
Vardah struck the shores of Tamil Nadu.
https://t.co/Z3MbYK32t0
Paytm users saw an outage of services yesterday night due to system upgrade
Digital wallet company Paytm faced an outage due to system upgrade by the website post 8 pm on
15 December. The payments company, which claims to have 160 million users using the service
both online and offline, saw an outage of services across mobile application, website and linked
transactions such as Uber, where Paytm is the only wallet partner. The outage lasted close to an
hour, indicating the system was up for `cleansing'. The company says after the government move to
push digital transactions in November, it has been processing over 5 million transactions daily.
https://t.co/Idl9FHXFAM
How Yahoo's 1 billion account breach stacks up with the biggest hacks ever
More than a billion Yahoo user accounts were hacked in 2013. That comes in addition to the 500
million user accounts that were stolen in 2014, a breach that was announced in September 2016. At
the time, that attack was regarded as the largest-ever single-source data hack in history. Then on
Wednesday, 14 December, the company announced a second hack that more than doubled the
record.
https://t.co/Q1eWLwAiIR
Tesco Bank left itself vulnerable to fraud by using sequential card numbers
Tesco Bank may have left itself open to fraud by issuing debit cards with sequential numbers,
according to a report by the FT. Criminals in November drained £2.5 million from 9000 current
accounts at the supermarket chain's banking operations in a hack that was described as "a
systematic, sophisticated attack" and was billed as "unprecedented in the UK" by the country's
banking watchdog.
https://t.co/l6AS2udvXP
An Availability Digest Oldie but Goodie from 2010: "Military GPS Disabled by Upgrade"
The U.S. Air Force planned to deploy a new GPS satellite system to replace the aging system now
in service. In anticipation of this deployment, the Air Force upgraded the software in its GPS ground-
control systems in early 2010 to be able to handle signals not only from the current GPS satellites
but also from the new satellites. The software in the 800,000 military GPS receivers in service at the
time also was upgraded to be compatible with both satellite systems. To everyone’s dismay, when
the new ground-control systems were brought into operation, 10,000 of the Air Force’s GPS
receivers wouldn’t work. The systems they supported were effectively down. It took two weeks to
come up with a temporary fix and months to test and deploy a permanent fix.
https://t.co/AITGvmIYat
5
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

An article from February 2016: "World dodges GPS bullet"
It happened in the blink of an eye. Less than a blink. Far less, actually. Slightly more than one one-
thousandth of an eye blink, according to calculations. In that amount of time, one of your eyelashes
traverses 10 micrometers on its journey toward your lower eyelid. And yet it was long enough to
throw computers and communications systems around the world out of whack, generate thousands
of alarms, and pull engineers from their beds at 2 a.m. One occurrence might have been enough to
do all that. But it kept happening over and over again.
https://t.co/d9o1boFakL
One petabyte of ATO data could be lost after tech crash
The Australian Taxation Office has restored access to some of its online services, but concerns
remain that large amounts of data have been lost after it suffered a "world-first" technical glitch to
equipment from Hewlett Packard Enterprise. The tech disaster comes hot on the heels of the
Australian Bureau of Statistics and IBM failing to manage the 2016 Census and raises further
questions about the ability of government departments to deliver modern online systems properly.
https://t.co/lJdAF7BFN8
DNS provider ChangeIP cites MySQL database crash for days-long outage
ChangeIP, which refers to itself as a "rockstar, low-cost and high-touch web host," hit a sour note
with customers in mid-December. The company reported that it "suffered a system-wide DB failure
that cascaded to all of our DB systems. Restore has been ongoing since yesterday [Sunday, Dec.
11]." ChangeIP said that due to the size of its MySQL database, recovery was taking longer than
anticipated; and it was hard to say when a total restore would take place.
https://t.co/WVyTJQriIH
ATO outage result of 'world first' HPE storage issue
The Australian Taxation Office (ATO) has called in its external service provider Hewlett Packard
Enterprise (HPE) to help it resolve hardware issues that have been plaguing its online services,
portals, and website since Monday morning, 12 December. The outages relate to a new hardware
storage solution that was upgraded in November 2015. The ATO’s primary backup systems, that
should have kicked in immediately, were also affected.
https://t.co/yumDuUb34V
A Digest Oldie but Goodie: "2015 - The Year of the Leap Second"
The leap second is such an erratic and infrequent occurrence that it is likely that many systems have
not been built to account for it. Those that have may not have been thoroughly tested for the
condition. This is the rational for everyone to monitor their systems carefully as the leap second
approaches at midnight on June 30th. With the Earth slowing down, do we have to worry about its
rotation stopping? Probably not. At its current deceleration, it will take about 2.6 billion years to stop,
if it stops at all.
https://t.co/haehkzhXD6
6
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Computers Will Deal with 2016's Leap Second by "Smearing Time"
If you can't wait for 2016 to be over, I have some bad news; it's going to be a little bit longer than
expected. In July of this year, the International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service
(IERS)—which regulates the international clock—announced that 2016 will end in a leap second. An
extra tick will be inserted into the year to make up for unpredictable variations to the Earth's rotation.
It means that before we hop into 2017, the clock will strike an unusual 23:59:60.
https://t.co/PjwBnOjqO7
Because This Year Hasn't Felt Long Enough, 2016 Will Last One Second Longer
The deaths of great artists, global tragedies, an acrimonious U.S. presidential campaign — these
events have made many of us eager to get the seemingly interminable nastiness that was 2016 over
with, once and for all. But thanks to the precision of modern timekeeping, we'll have to wait one
additional second on New Year's Eve before we can welcome what hopefully will be a better 2017.
https://t.co/MDNQgPnzvD
HPE Intros a Micro Datacenter on Wheels
Hewlett Packard Enterprise (HPE) has introduced what it calls a Micro Datacenter — an equipment
rack-sized cabinet that’s meant to be a modular piece of a data center. The concept is as simple as
it sounds; it’s a shard of the data center put into a form that’s physically easy to move to where it’s
needed (relatively speaking). It even has wheels.
https://t.co/C9UIzmLbJc
Hyperconvergence: what businesses need to know
As companies grow, their IT systems tend to expand in a way that can lead to them becoming
unwieldy and hard to control. Hyperconvergence is about simplifying things by consolidating the IT
infrastructure into a virtualised system. Essentially it’s a software-defined architecture that merges
storage, networking and other resources on a single system based on commodity hardware. The
benefits include being able to manage the whole thing as a single system via a common tool set.
https://t.co/ililp13i60
Do You Have a Plan for When Your ISP Goes Down?
It can happen to anyone—everything in your facility is working as intended; and suddenly, without
warning, all your company’s activities come grinding to a halt. Somewhere outside your facility, a
cable has been cut; and the end result is that your Internet service provider (ISP) is down. In the
event that you’re hit with an outage caused by an unexpected incident, it’s essential that you have a
clear, established response process that includes the following:
https://t.co/9CWaYXKvVa
The 5 biggest hacks of 2016 and the organizations they crippled
CIO Dive’s picks for the five biggest hacks in 2016 are notable not only for their size and scope
but for the perpetrators’ ability to use new approaches or twists to reach the end goal of
disrupting networks and systems on which we’ve all come to rely.
https://t.co/Oxxm2XTHGx
7
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Gas plants, not wind, may have been at fault in South Australia blackout
The role of ageing gas-fired generators may have been part of the problem in the events leading up
to the state-wide blackout in South Australia in September. Experts say that the outage could
perhaps have been avoided if the gas generators had been replaced by inverter linked renewables
and storage.
https://t.co/6S4NUXWVTH
The Machine prototype finally unveiled by HPE
Hewlett Packard Enterprise has finally revealed a working prototype of The Machine, a research
project first announced in 2014 that hoped to "reinvent the fundamental architecture of computing."
The achievement is bittersweet, though, as it seems that HPE no longer plans to commercialize The
Machine as a complete solution. Instead, bits and pieces of the project will filter down into other
commercial HPE servers and technologies.
https://t.co/AzsCe0ZLzN
Tesla and SolarCity Empowered an Entire Island with Solar Energy
In early December, Tesla Motors acquired SolarCity, which is a solar energy service provider. The
founders of SolarCity, Peter and Lyndon Rive, are Elon Musk’s cousins. Both these companies have
similar objectives, and hence it comes as no surprise that the acquisition took place. In fact, the
companies already have begun a solar project together. Tesla and SolarCity will provide solar
energy technology to an entire island. The Ta’u Island in American Samoa only has a population of
around 600 people. Tesla and SolarCity will provide nearly 100 percent of the power required
through solar energy to all the people residing here. This will be a great step to promote the use of
renewable energy as a major source to cut down on the carbon emissions.
https://t.co/iklGL8Ekg7
Nearly one million Android phones infected by hackers
Hackers have gained access to more than 1.3 million Google accounts -- emails, photos, documents
and more -- by infecting Android phones through illegitimate apps. That discovery comes from
computer researchers at Check Point, a cybersecurity firm. The hackers have managed to steal
digital "tokens" that give them access to Google services, like a person's email and photo collection.
But according to Google, hackers have not yet tapped that information and stolen it.
https://t.co/aHbxPH0mLM
8
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

