Don’t Let Your Network Crash
October 2017
There is nothing that can ruin your day more than to have your network crash. Imagine
being without the Internet for hours at a time. Most of us would be unable to accomplish
much during that period.
Fortunately, our networks are quite robust. The TCP/IP protocol now in common use guarantees the
proper error-free delivery of messages. And our networks have many paths so that messages can be
routed around failed network segments and still reach their recipients.
However, networks have not always been so robust. In 1990, a software bug propagated through the ATT
network and took down the entire ATT system for hours. A decade earlier, a similar bug collapsed the
ARPANET. The ARPANET was one of the earliest networks and through its failure history paved the way
for today’s ultra-reliable networks.
The ARPANET
The Advanced Research Projects Agency Network (ARPANET) was an early packet-switching network.
The ARPANET established its first computer-to-computer link on October 29, 1969.
As the ARPANET project progressed, protocols for internetworking were developed so that multiple
separate networks could be joined into a network of networks. 1n 1982, the Internet Protocol Suite
(TCP/IP) was introduced as the standard networking protocol on the ARPANET. These technologies
became the technical foundation for the Internet.
The ARPANET was decommissioned in 1990.
The First Major Network Crash – the ARPANET
The ARPANET initially linked four sites in California and Utah. It later was expanded to cover research
centers across the country.
The ARPANET was the granddaddy of network crashes. On October 27, 1980, it experienced its first
network crash. The network failure resulted from a redundant single-error detecting code that was used
for transmission but not storage, and a garbage-collection algorithm for removing old messages that was
not resistant to the simultaneous existence of one message with several different time stamps. The
combination of the events took the network down for four hours.
1
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

The Amadeus Network Disruption
On September 28, 2017, a passenger management system used by dozens of airlines went offline.
A technical problem described as a ‘network issue’ forced crowded airports to issue manual
boarding passes, creating long queues and worldwide flight delays. Disruptions to check-in service
were reported from London’s Heathrow Airport (LHR) to Singapore’s Changi (SIN) and even in the US at
airports such as Washington, DC’s Reagan Airport (DCA).
The disruption was caused by an internal issue with IT firm Amadeus. The company’s Altea software is
used by more than 100 airlines around the world. Passengers traveling with a number of airlines, such as
British Airways, Air France, KLM, Southwest, Lufthansa and more, reported the delays when checking in.
The program that caused the delays was a passenger management system. It was used to manage
booking and check-in systems, allowing airlines to check who's meant to be on each flight.
Amadeus confirmed that its network had a disruption and that it was working to resolve it.
“Amadeus confirms that during the morning, we experienced a network issue that caused disruption to
some of our systems,” an Amadeus spokesperson said. “As a result of the incident, customers
experienced disruption to certain services.”
The company said that services were gradually being restored, and its technical teams were working to
identify the cause and restore services as quickly as possible. A spokesperson for London’s Heathrow
Airport confirmed that the airport had faced disruptions as a result of the outage.
“A small number of airlines are currently experiencing intermittent issues with their check-in systems at
airports around the world — including at Heathrow,” the spokesperson said. “Passengers will still be able
to check-in for their flight, although the process may take slightly longer than usual. We are working
closely with our airlines to help resolve the issue as quickly as possible.”
The outage was unusual because of the scale of the problem. Usually, a technical incident is limited to a
single airline or airport. Yesterday, passengers in London, Australia, Singapore and France, among many
others, were forced to wait when a software package used by over 130 different airlines experienced a
brief spell of technical problems.
The DarkNet
The DarkNet is a private network in which connections are made only between trusted peers. It is
structured to maintain the anonymity of its users. A person can only access a Darknet web site if he has
been approved by the other members of the web site. For instance, if you want to get onto a hacker’s web
site, you have to prove to the current members that you are a legitimate hacker.
The DarkNet actually originated quite legally under the auspices of ARPANET, the predecessor to the
Internet. Launched in 2002, a project called Tor was set up by the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory with
the purpose of protecting U.S. intelligence communications. It allowed groups of people using the Internet
to maintain complete anonymity.
Tor is an acronym for The Onion Ring project because of its many layers of protection. Tor directs
Internet traffic through a worldwide, volunteer network of more than 5,000 relays to conceal a user’s
location and usage from anyone conducting network surveillance. Tor is currently supported by the
nonprofit Tor Project (www.torproject.com) and is heavily used legitimately by groups of people who need
to keep their communications absolutely private.
2
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

IPv4 and IPv6
IPv4 was the fourth version of the Internet Protocol and was introduced in 1981. Growing out of the
ARPANET (Advanced Research Projects Agency Network), a joint venture of the U.S. Department of
Defense and several universities and laboratories, the primary use of the Internet was expected to be for
the exchange of scientific papers and studies for academia.
However, the Internet’s use expanded beyond the wildest expectations. It was almost doomed to failure
by its use of IPv4 to assign addresses to Internet hosts. The 32-bit addressing space of IPv4 could
provide addressing to about four billion hosts, and it was about to run out, which would doom the Internet
to almost certain failure.
Thus, IPv6 was born. With its 128-bit address space, there is no concern of running out of host
addresses. IPv6 can provide 1038 host addresses.
Will the Cloud Be Able To Handle IoT?
Devices carrying the IoT label are inherently sensors that collect data and send it to be processed,
usually via multiple mathematical components. Consider a smart car sending fuel economy data back to
its manufacturer via its IoT devices. Not only is each car’s raw data being sent, but also factors like road
surface, tire quality, outside temperature and average speed. All this data is uploaded to the cloud where
the car manufacturer’s business intelligence tools perform computations and analysis, then produce
massive data sets. These data sets are then downloaded to the car manufacturer for analysis.
The IoT device plays little more than the role of the messenger here. the IoT device and the cloud are
highly sophisticated machines; but it is the cloud that is doing almost all of the heavy lifting, which can
leave it showing considerable strain for its efforts.
Despite like-minded technologies at their cores, IoT and cloud computing have several properties that
conflict with one another that are factors in this strain.
In general, cloud computing resources are fairly inexpensive in terms of availability, can perform tasks
rapidly and are quite flexible in meeting the needs of each user they serve. User location is irrelevant to
using the cloud; as long as you have the Internet, you can connect.
Conversely, IoT devices are more expensive (in terms of development and deployment), they are not
nearly as flexible, and they are generally stuck in one location.
The number of IoT devices is expected to skyrocket over the next several years, to be numbered in the
billions. Can our clouds handle this computational workload? Will IoT devices cause some of our clouds
to fail?
Hacking on the Internet
The worst network crash would be that of the Internet. Yet the Internet is susceptible to being crashed by
hackers.
In November, 1988, the news broke that a dangerous computer worm – the first to spread widely – was
slithering across the Internet. As the attack raged, crashing thousands of machines and causing millions
of dollars in damage, it became clear that the failure went beyond a single flaw in the Internet. The worm
was using the Internet’s essential nature — fast, open and frictionless — to deliver malicious code along
computer lines designed to carry harmless files or e-mails.
3
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Decades later, after hundreds of billions of dollars spent on computer security, the threat posed by the
Internet seems to grow worse each year. Where hackers once attacked only computers, the penchant for
destruction has now leapt beyond the virtual realm to threaten banks, retailers, government agencies,
and, experts worry, critical mechanical systems in dams, power plants and aircraft.
Summary
Fortunately, once we got past the ARPANET days, network crashes have become a rarity. But with the
openness of the Internet and its widespread importance to billions of people, we are once again faced
with the possibility of a major network failure. It is important for every corporation, and in fact every
person, to consider the consequences of an extended Internet outage and how they will carry on during
that time.
Acknowledgements
Information for this article was taken from the following sources:
The IPV4 Doomsday, The Availability Digest; August 2009.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0408/ipv4_doomsday.pdf
With 100% Uptime, Do I Need a Business Continuity Plan? The Availability Digest; October 2006.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0101/do_i_need_a_bcp.pdf
The DarkNet, Availability Digest; September 2014.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0909/darknet.pdf
A Flaw in the Design, The Washington Post; May 30, 2015.
‘Network Issue’ Causes Check-In Systems to Crash Worldwide; Passengers Report Massive Delays, The
The Points Guy; September 28, 2017.
How will the cloud be able to handle the emergence of IoT, Network World; October 3, 2017.
Bug in software used by 130 airlines creates check-in chaos, Digital Journal; September 29, 2017.
A Day in History: October 27, Computer History Museum.
ARPANET, Wikipedia.
4
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman
