Hypoxic Fire-Prevention Systems
January2011
Why drown your servers in water or damage your disks with an explosive release of fire-
suppressinggas1whenyoucanpreventafireinthefirstplace?Thatistheroleofanhypoxicfire-
preventionsystem.Thesesystemsmaintainanoxygenlevelinacomputerroom thatisbelowthe
levelrequiredtosustainafirebutwhichisatasafelevelforhumans.
How do these systems work, and are they really safe to the system operators confined to the
oxygen-depletedenvironment?Wereviewtheseissuesinthisarticle.
The Basis for Hypoxic Fire Suppression
Air as we know it is a mixture primarily of two gases – oxygen and nitrogen. Normal air contains
21% oxygen, 78% nitrogen, and 1% of other gases such as carbon dioxide. This combination is
kind to both humans and fire. But reducing the oxygen percentage to 16% creates an air mixture
that is still kind to humans but is death to most fires. This is the basis of hypoxic fire-prevention
systems.
Understanding how hypoxic fire suppression works depends on understanding two physical
characteristicsoftheamountofoxygenintheairwebreathe:partialpressureandconcentration.
PartialPressure
In a mixture of gases such as air, each gas has a partial pressure. This is the pressure that the
gaswouldhaveifitoccupiedtheentirespace.
Atsealevel under standard conditions,air exerts apressureof 14.7pounds per square inch(this
is the equivalent of 33 feet of water on top of us, as any SCUBA diver knows). Since oxygen is
causing 21% of this pressure, oxygen is exerting a pressure on us of 3.1 pounds per square inch
–itspartialpressure.
As we move higher in altitude, the amount of air above us decreases; and the air pressure goes
down. Up to 18,000 feet, the decrease in air pressure is nearly linear. At 9,000 feet, it is 75% of
sea level pressure. At 18,000 feet, it is 50% of sea level pressure. However, at anyaltitude, air is
air. It still contains 21% oxygen. Therefore, at 9,000 feet, for instance, oxygen is exerting a
pressureonusof2.3poundspersquareinch.Thereis25%lessoxygentobreath.
1InFebruary,2010,anaccidentalreleaseofInergengastookdownhostingproviderWestHostforsixdays.Itturnedout
that the noise of the gas discharge damaged multiple hard drives. See WestHost Fire Suppression Test Fiasco – An
Update, Availability Digest;September2010. Tyco, thecompanythat manufactures theInergengas, has indicatedthat
theyunderstandthisproblemandareworkingonasolutionbydevelopingimprovementstotheInergennozzle.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0509/westhost_update.pdf
1
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

As we all know, if we go high enough, there comes a point where there is not enough oxygen to
support life. However, humans are fairly flexible in this regard. Commercial aircraft are
pressurized at 8,000 feet. People live comfortably in La Paz, Bolivia, where the altitude ranges
from 10,000 to 13,000 feet. A few climbers have successfully scaled 29,000-foot Mt. Everest
withoutoxygen.
Going the other way shows equal flexibility. A scuba diver descending to 110 feet is under a
pressureoffouratmospheres,or 58.8poundsper squareinch.Thefourfoldincreaseinoxygenis
of no concern. However, the fourfold increase in nitrogen can cause a painful and sometimes
fatal condition called the bends if the diver remains submerged for too long and surfaces too
quickly.
Concentration
The concentration of a particular gas in a mix of gases is the percent of the gas that it makes up.
It is directly proportional to the gas’ partial pressure. In standard air, the concentration of oxygen
is21%;andthisconcentrationremainsfairlyconstantatallaltitudes.
However,air mixtures with differentconcentrations finduses inmanyapplications.SCUBAdivers
oftenuse an air mixturecalled Nitrox, whichcontains a higher concentration of oxygen– typically
32% to 36%. The reduced nitrogen content allows them to stay submerged longer without
sufferingtheeffectsofthebends.
Inergen is a gas used to suppress fires. It is commonly used in data centers and comprises 52%
nitrogen, 40% argon, and 8% carbon dioxide. Note – no oxygen. Typically, when a fire is
detected, enough Inergen is released to reduce the oxygen concentration in the computer room
toabout10%to12%,whichisnotenoughtosupportcombustion.However,theincreasedcarbon
dioxide level in Inergen increases a person’s respiration rate (it is carbon dioxide in our blood
stream thatinvokes thebreathingresponse), allowing aperson tofunction inthereduced oxygen
levellongenoughtoexittheroom.
Combustion
Fire requires oxygen. But how much? As it turns out, it is not the amount of oxygen that supports
combustion(oxygen’spartialpressure)butratheritsconcentration.
The fact that the partial pressure of oxygen is not a significant factor in combustion can be
observed bythe fact that people in La Paz light fires at 13,000 feet. Non-turbocharged cars climb
14,000-foot Pikes Peak. One would expect that climbers could light camp fires at much higher
altitudes.
But reducing the concentration of oxygen from 21% to 16% snuffs out most fires. This is
equivalenttoanaltitudeof about9,000 feet.Even if thetotal pressureof this oxygen-depletedair
isincreasedsothatthetotalamountofoxygenavailableisequaltothatofnormalairatsealevel,
combustionstillwillnottakeplace.
HypoxicAir
Oxygen-depleted air is called hypoxic air. How does hypoxic air suppress a fire? When a heat
source is applied to a combustible material, it causes that material to react with oxygen and
releasemoreenergyinthe form of heat.This chemicalreaction is thebeginning of afire,andthe
increasedheatenergycausesmorecombustiblematerialtoreactwithoxygen.Thefirespreads.
2
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

If there is an abundance of nitrogen in the air compared to normal air, then less heat energy is
generated due to the decreased oxygen, and more of what is generated is absorbed by heating
the nitrogen. At some point of reduced oxygen concentration, the nitrogen overwhelms the
oxygen;andafirecannotcontinue.Itisextinguished.
A graphic illustration of the effects of hypoxic air is shown in the YouTube video at
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e3Itn66hs5s
The U.S. Naval Research Laboratory has performed an extensive study of the effects of oxygen
concentration on combustibility.2 It found that many materials that burn in air will not burn at an
oxygen concentration of 17%. Highly flammable liquids such as gasoline will not burn below an
oxygenconcentrationof12%.
But can people survive in an hypoxic air environment? Studies have shown that theycan indeed.
The U.S. Navyhas determined that there are no untoward effects on healthyhumans living in an
hypoxic environment of 17% oxygen at one atmospheric pressure. Submariners living in such an
environment would be as effective as people living in Denver, Colorado, since both have the
samepartialpressureofoxygenequivalenttoanaltitudeof5,000feet.
Hypoxic Fire-Prevention Systems
Firepreventionsystems usinghypoxic air areavailable commercially. Examples ofsuchproducts
are:
 Prevenex(www.prevenex.com)ofBoulder,Colorado.
 ToreEideASofBergen,Norway(Prevenex)
(http://www.toreeide.no/IndexEnglish.html).
 FirePASS(Fire Prevention and SuppressionSystem) from FirePASSCorporation of New
YorkCityandFirePASSAGofSwitzerland(www.firepass.com).
 WagnerUKLimitedofCambridge,England(www.wagner-uk.com).
These systems convert the data center’s normal incoming airflow to hypoxic air. This is done
either by removing some oxygen from the air or by adding nitrogen. Oxygen concentration is
typically reduced to about 16%. It has been determined that this concentration level will prevent
materialscommonlyfoundindatacentersfromcatchingfireandburning.
Is Hypoxic Air Safe for Humans?
A 16% concentration of oxygen is equivalent to a 9,000-foot altitude. At first glance, this would
seem to be safe for humans. However, it is a different 9,000 feet than that represented by
oxygen’spartialpressureinnormalair.Doesthehumanbodynoticethedifference?
MostSayIt’sSafe
The general consensus is that hypoxic air at levels required to satisfy data center fire protection
are perfectly safe for humans, and many systems currently installed attest to that fact. The U.S.
Navy,forinstance,hasconcludedthata17%oxygenconcentrationissafeforsubmariners.
AccordingtoinformationpostedbyFirePASSandPrevenex,
2H.W.Carhart,ImpactofO onfires,JournalofHazardousMaterials;1994.
2
3
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

 The National Fire Protection Agency Association (NFPA) Standard 2001, “Clean Agent
Fire Extinguishing Systems,” rates an hypoxic atmosphere of 12% oxygen as a “No
ObservableAdverseEffectLevel”onhumans.
