Real-Time Fraud Detection
December2009
Much of today’s commerce depends on plastic. People use their
credit cards and debit cards to purchase products, get cash, and
pay bills. If card services come to a halt, much of today’s
commercecomestoahaltaswell.
Credit and debit cards are issued by banks. Each card
transaction must be approved by the issuing bank before it can
beacceptedbyamerchantoranATM.
The heart of credit card and debit card services is the authorization networks that relay card
transactions to the banks that issued the cards. Transaction authorization must be returned in
real-time because the customer is waiting for it.Without these networks, a bank cannot authorize
card transactions; and card transactions cease (unless a merchant is willing to take a card
transactiononfaithandenteritwhenthenetworkisrestored).
It is for this reason that many of these authorization networks use continuously available
active/active switches to route card transactions to the issuing banks. When a card is used at a
merchant’s point-of-sale (POS) device, the transaction is sent via an authorization network to the
bank that issued the card. Likewise, when a bank servicing its own ATMs receives an ATM
request for a card issued by another bank, it uses an authorization network to send the
transactiontotheissuingbank.
merchant authorization
issuing
POSs network
banks
andATMs
Debit-CardandCredit-CardAuthorization
The issuing bank determines whether the transaction should be allowed and returns an
authorization or rejection response to the POS device or ATM, which then takes appropriate
action. A transaction may be denied for many reasons, including exceeding the account balance
for a debit card, exceeding the credit limit or daily limit for a credit card, a card that has been
reportedtobelostorstolen,orsuspectedfraudulentactivity.
Determining fraudulent activity is a massively complex problem that depends upon a variety of
business algorithms. A simple example is a card being used for a purchase at a store in Los
Angeles just a few minutes after it was used in New York. Fraud detection typically requires the
storage of all recent card transaction activity and a data-mining capability to monitor the
transaction historyfor suspicious activity. As a consequence, it can take hours to determine such
1
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

activityandtoputaholdonthecard,duringwhichtimemultiplefraudulenttransactionsmayhave
occurred–allofwhichmayhavetobecoveredbythebank.
A Major Authorization Network
Most fraud detection today is done by the issuing banks, and their systems mayrequire hours or
moretodetectfraudulentactivity.Amajorprovider ofcardtransaction-switchingservicesdecided
toofferreal-timefraud-detectionservicesforits issuing-bank customers.Itfeltthatitcoulddeploy
fraud-detection systems that were more powerful, and therefore faster, than could most of its
bank customers because it would be sharing the high costs of these systems among many
banks. The goal was to detect suspicious activity before a transaction acknowledgement was
returned so that suspicious transactions could be denied or could require a call by the customer
totheissuingbankbeforeauthorization.
However, before we describe the provider’s real-time fraud-detection system, let us look at its
authorization network.1 The service provider operates a four-node NonStop active/active2 switch
toroutecardtransactionsfrommerchantsandbanksservicingATMstothebanksthatissuedthe
cards. For disaster tolerance, the nodes are split between two data centers, one in the Northeast
U.S.andoneintheSoutheastU.S.
authorization
N/S N/S
cardtx
issuing
S/B repl
ok bank
POS
tx authorization
N/S N/S
ok
ok cardtx
tx
tx servicing
CenterNorth CenterSouth
bank
ATM Active/ActiveAuthorizationSwitch
Transactions are routed to the switch via the provider’s intelligent IP network. POS devices
(generally through a common controller operated by the retail merchant) are serviced by a
specified node – typicallythe one that is closest. Online merchants and ATM servicing banks are
similarlyassigned to specific nodes. Bycontrast, each issuing bank mayhave its load distributed
across multiple nodes. In this way, the transaction load is spread among the four nodes in the
active/activenetwork.
Each node has a configuration database that specifies which merchants, servicing banks, and
issuing banks are assigned to it. The nodes are interconnected in a mesh network by
ShadowbasebidirectionaldatareplicationenginesfromGravic,Inc.
(www.gravic.com/shadowbase). A database change entered into any one node in the application
network is immediatelyreplicated tothe other nodes sothatall nodes have an up-to-datecopyof
theconfigurationdatabase.
The configuration database also performs a very important disaster-recovery function in that it
specifies a backup node for each connection should its node fail. Usually, a node fails over to its
companion node in the same data center. Should there be a data-center failure in which both
nodesaredown,failoveristotheotherdatacenter.
1PaymentAuthorization–AJourneyfromDRtoActive/Active,AvailabilityDigest;December2007.
2WhatisActive/Active?AvailabilityDigest;October2006.
2
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Because of the failover information contained in the configuration database for each node, the
data that is replicated is not a one-to-one replication. Rather, the data replicated to each node
must be modified to represent the failover sequence for that node. This mapping is done by user
exitsintheShadowbasereplicationengines.
Configuration updates are required when merchants and banks are added or dropped.
Furthermore, a merchant or a bank maybe moved to another node for load-balancing purposes.
Though it is unlikely that two such administrative actions will result in a data collision, it can
happen.Ifthisoccurs,thelaterofthetwochangesisaccepted.
Cardtransactionsarenotreplicatedbetweenthenodessincetheyaretransientinnature.Rather,
each node batches its transactions and frequently sends transaction batches to the other nodes
viatheprovider’sIPnetwork.
Given this architecture, any node can receive a transaction for any card. Large issuing banks
have connections to all nodes and receive each transaction from the node that is connected to
theATMorPOSdevicethatoriginatedthetransaction.Ifthenodereceivingthetransactionisnot
the node servicing the issuing bank, the transaction is routed over the IP network to the
appropriateswitchnode,whichforwardsittothebank.Theissuingbank isdeterminedbythefirst
six digits of the credit or debit card. When the bank returns its authorization response, this
responseisreturnedbyitsnodetotherequestingretailerorservicingbank.
The architecture of the active/active system is used to advantage to eliminate planned downtime.
If a node needs to be upgraded, its connections are assigned to its companion node in its data
center. The node is then downed, upgraded, and returned to service. In this way, the upgrade
processiswithinthecontrolofthedatacenter’sITstaff.
The provider’s switching network provides services for hundreds of thousands of devices. The
network willsurviveanyfaultinthenetwork,includingnetwork components,processingnodes,or
an entire data center. Since transactions are automatically failed over to a surviving node
following a failure, faults are transparent to the provider’s customers; and continuous availability
isachieved.
Real-Time Fraud-Detection Service
FraudDetection–TheOldWay
In monitoring fraud detection, most issuing banks provide their own systems. Transactions are
written to a log file as they are authorized. Recorded are the card number, the authorization date
and time, the location of the POS or ATM activity, and the transaction amount. A separate fraud-
detection system periodically inspects this log. Optimized to perform complex analyses on a
card’s transaction history, the system flags suspicious activity and writes this information to a
separatelog,whichisreturnedtotheauthorizationsystem.
The authorization system can then take appropriate action. It may accept the transaction; it may
deny the transaction; or, for example, it may require the customer to call a bank representative
beforethetransactioncanbeauthorized.
The problem with this method is that it can take hours or even days to detect suspicious activity.
In general, the bank is responsible for fraudulent transactions; and this delay can represent a
significantcosttothebank.
3
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

CatchingFraudOn-the-Fly
The transaction switching-service provider realized that catching fraudulent transactions as they
were being executed at a retail counter, online, or at an ATM would be a unique and valuable
service to offer to its issuing-bank customers, a service that would distinguish its network from
other ATM/POS switching networks. Providing the powerful analytical systems to accomplish this
complex task in real-time would be expensive, but the costs would be amortized across many
issuingbanks;andthefraudcouldbedetectedsooner.
The provider chose Oracle as the fraud database running on Sun M5000 Solaris servers.3 The
Sun M5000 is a highly scalable server that can contain up to eight SPARC64 quad-core
processors. Each data center has its own fraud-detection complex that supports multiple
Oracle/Solaris fraud-detection servers. The fraud-detection complex is easily scalable by adding
additional fraud-detection servers. Each server within a data center monitors a specified range of
cardnumbers.Shouldaserverfail,anotherserverassumesthecardrangeofthefailedserver.
As a transaction is received bythe switch node that is servicing the issuing bank, the transaction
is sent not only to the bank for authorization, but it is also replicated to a local fraud-detection
serverbyaShadowbasereplicationengine.Shadowbasedeterminesthefraudservertowhichto
send the transaction according to routing rules based on the card number bound into
Shadowbase.
issuing
card bank
tx
Oracle/Solaris Oracle/Solaris
frauddetection frauddetection
Shadowbase N/S N/S Shadowbase
S/B repl
Shadowbase Shadowbase
N/S N/S
CenterNorth CenterSouth
Real-TimeFraudDetection
The fraud server quickly analyzes the transaction for suspicious activity. If it determines that the
transaction may be fraudulent, it immediately notifies the switch node of this determination via
reverse Shadowbase replication. This notification includes a severity flag that indicates the
degreeofsuspiciondeterminedforthetransaction.
The goal is to return the notification before the issuing bank returns its authorization so that real-
timeactioncanbetaken.If theresponse from thefraudserver is received intime,the switchcan
take such action as specified by the issuing bank. Based on the severity flag, the switch might
allow the transaction, reject it, or require the customer to call a bank representative before the
transactionisauthorized.
3
Real-Time Credit and Debit Card Fraud Detection: A Shadowbase Real-Time Business Intelligence Solution, Gravic
whitepaper;October3,2009.
http://www.gravic.com/shadowbase/pdf/FDC%20-%20Fraud%20Detection%20Case%20Study%202009_10_7.pdf
4
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

In any event, the issuing bank is notified of the suspicious activity so that it can notify the card
holderandtakesuchotheractionsonfuturetransactionsasitdeemsappropriate.
Of course, a transaction might pass through any node on its way to the issuing bank depending
upon the current failover configuration. Therefore, it is important that both data centers be aware
of all recent activity associated with a particular card. To accomplish this, transactions are
buffered by each switch node as they are sent to the cards’ issuing banks and are transmitted in
near-realtimetothefraud-detectioncomplex intheother datacenter.Shouldoneswitchingnode
fail, its connections are transferred to the other node in the same data center. However, should
both nodes in a data center fail, the fraud systems in the other data center are ready to continue
monitoringtransactionssenttoallissuingbanks.
Summary
This real-time fraud-detection system is an excellent example of real-time business intelligence
(RTBI).4 RTBI allows events to control the actions of an enterprise in real time by immediately
integratingtheindependentresultsofdiverseheterogeneoussystemsintoacoherentaction.
RTBI will provide the competitive edge to companies in the future. In this example, a NonStop
authorization switch, a Solaris/Oracle fraud-detection server, and an issuing bank’s mainframe
authorization system cooperate to affect the outcome of a transaction request while the
transaction is still in progress. This complex interaction is made possible in the example by high-
performance, real-time, bidirectional data replication, which is an underlying technology
fundamentaltoreal-timebusinessintelligence.
4Real-TimeBusinessIntelligence,Gravicwhitepaper.
http://www.gravic.com/shadowbase/uses/real-timebusinessintelligenceintroduction.html
5
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com