DDoS Attacks on the Rise
April2013
ADDoSattack causesamassiveamountoftraffictobesenttoa websiteinan attempttodisableit.The
web site is so overwhelmed by the malicious traffic that it cannot respond to legitimate requests and is
effectivelydown.
Prolexic, a firm that provides DDoS attack mitigation services,1 publishes a monthly report that
summarizes DDoSactivityfor thequarter andcompares ittopastperiods.Ithas foundthatDDoS activity
in2012ismorethan50%greaterthanitwasin2011.
Prolexic manages a Security Operations Center (SOC) staffed by DDoS experts who monitor the traffic
entering a customer’s web site. If malicious activity is suspected, the Prolexic staff will alert the customer
and will provide recommendations for thwarting the attack. If the attack cannot be fended off by the
customer taking advantage of his firewalls, intrusion-detection appliances, and other defenses, Prolexic
will reroute the traffic to one of its four worldwide scrubbing data centers. There, the malicious traffic will
befilteredout;andcleantrafficwillbereturnedtothecustomer.
Prolexic detects and blocks between ten and eighty DDoS attacks every day for its customers. The
volume of attacks and their sizes continue to increase. Prolexic mitigated more attacks in the first quarter
of 2012 than it did in all of 2011. The norm of 10 gigabit per second (gbps) attacks has grown to over 50
gbps.ArecentattackonSpamhausexceed300gbps.2
Inthisarticle,wereviewProlexic’sfindingsaspublishedinitsfourthquarter,2012,report.3
DDoS Attack Statistics
2012sawamarkedincreaseinthenumberofattacksandtheirsizesagainstProlexiccustomers.Prolexic
mitigatedsevenhigh-bandwidthattacks exceeding 50 gbps attacks in2012. Thenumber of attacks inthe
fourth quarter of 2012 was the highest ever recorded by Prolexic. The number of attacks in 2012
representeda53%increaseovertheattacksin2011.
Attacks ingenerallastedformorethanaday.Theaverageattack duration was 32hours.Severalattacks
lastedseveraldays.
Attacks ranged across a variety of industries, including financial services, e-commerce, software-as-a-
service(SaaS),energy,andevenISPs.Therewasnodeclineinthelevelofattacksonanyindustry.
1Prolexic–ADDoSMitigationServicesCompany,AvailabilityDigest;April2013.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0804/prolexic.pdf
2History’sLargestDDoSAttack?,AvailabilityDigest;April2013.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0804/spamhaus.pdf
3ProlexicQuarterlyGlobalDDoSAttackReport,ProlexicWhitePaper;2013.
1
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

DDoS Attack Vectors
There are several ways in which a DDoS attack can be carried out.4 Each vector (the method used to
assaultthecomputersystemornetwork)attacksaspecificlayerintheInternetprotocolsuite.
Attacks against Layer 3 (Internet) and Layer 4 (Transport) were favored. They accounted for 75% of all
attacks. SYN floods were the most popular attack. In a SYN flood, a connection request is sent to the
victim and then is not completed, causing an exhaustion of resources required to make further
connections. UDP floods (see itsoknoproblembro, described below) and ICMP floods (typically pings)
werealsocommon.
Level 7 attacks included GET and POST floods, in which bogus requests are sent to read data from the
websiteortopostdata(suchasforms)toit.
Countries of Origin
Duringthefourthquarterof2012,thetoptencountriesgeneratingDDoSattacksandtheircontributionsto
theseattacksareasfollows:
China 55.4%
Germany 9.1%
India 8.8%
Egypt 5.7%
Pakistan 4.3%
Indonesia 3.6%
Turkey 3.6%
Thailand 3.5%
France 3.3%
UnitedStates 2.7%
This represents amarkeddecrease in DDoS activity originating in the United States, perhaps due to law-
enforcementactivities.
DNS Reflection Attacks
A significant change in strategy was reflected in the increasing use of DNS reflection attacks. A DNS
reflection attack is staged by the attacker sending DNS requests to a DNS server with a spoofed source
address. The source address is set to that of the victim’s system. Therefore, the DNS responses are
returnedtothevictim.
This is aparticularlyvicious attack sincethereis abouta100:1ratiobetweenthesizeof theDNSrequest
message(about30bytes)andthesizeoftheDNSresponsemessage(about3,000bytes).Therefore,an
attackerneedonlygenerate1%ofthetrafficwithwhichhewishestobombardhisvictim.
In the case of the Spamhaus attack referenced above, DNS reflection was used to generate an
unprecedentedattack of300gbps.Theattackeronlyhadtogenerate3gbps,atrivialamountforabotnet
ofmodestsize.
DNS reflection attacks depend upon the existence of DNS open resolvers. In the early days of the
Internet,a DNS server wouldrespond toanyrequestfor aURL-to-IP translation, regardless of its source.
This was later determined to be a security hole, and provisions were made to close the resolvers so that
they would only respond to requests from their administrative domains or from other DNS servers.
4AnatomyofaDDoSAttack,AvailabilityDigest;April2013.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0804/ddos_anatomy.pdf
2
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

However, system administrators are not incentivized to add this task to their otherwise busy schedules.
Theresultis thatthereare still 27millionopenresolvers ontheInternet. Even worse,theIPaddresses of
allofthesesystemshavebeenpublished.
The popularity of this attack vector has been enhanced by many publicly available toolkits designed to
engineer such attacks.The most popular toolkit is itsoknoproblembro (think “its ok no problem bro”).This
toolkit infects servers to create a high-bandwidth botnet. The infection finds its way into servers via
vulnerabilities in such popular applications an Joomla, WordPress, AWStats, Plesk, cPanel, phpMyFaQ,
andothers.Itsoknoproblembroplayedaroleinmostofthelargerattacks.
Itsoknoproblembroinserts anencryptedpayloadindx.phpintoawebsite’smainfile,index.php.Index.php
is the default file that is executed when a web site is accessed via its URL. The infecting file, indx.php,
allows the server to become a bot in a large DDoS botnet army that can now launch multiple types of
DDoS attacks simultaneously. Indx.php allows the command and control server to upload files and shells
ofmaliciouscodeintotherealindex.phpfile.Theyarethenexecuted whenthe websiteisaccessed.The
maliciouscodeactsasaPHPevalscript,whichisverydangerousbecauseitallowsexecutionofarbitrary
PHP code. It allows hackers to maintain persistent infections on compromised hosts even when the
maliciousfilesarediscoveredandremoved.
There is an active battle between attackers and researchers. As attackers determine that malware-
detection facilities are targeting itsoknoproblembro, they change its signatures to evade detection. For
instance,over aperiodofafew weeks,thefilenameoftheinfectionchangedfrom indx.phptoinedx.php,
thentoconfigic.php,andbackagain.
Prolexic has published an itsoknoproblembro threat advisory containing detailed mitigation rules for the
threat.5Thethreatadvisorycontains:
 Detailsonhowthetoolkitoperatesandhowithasevolved.
 Analysisofthetoolkitfiles.
 Profilesof11differentattacksignatureswithdetailedrulesforDDoSmitigation.
 Detectionrulestoidentifyinfectedwebservers(bRobots).
 A free log analysis tool (BroLog.py) that can be used to pinpoint which scripts were accessed, by
whatIPaddress,andforwhatDDoStargetstoaidsanitizationefforts
Mitigating DDoS Attacks
TherearethreewaystodealwithDDoSattacks:
 Filtertheattackbylookingforattacksignatures.
 DistributetheattackoveralargenumberofserversdedicatedtoDDoSattackmitigation.
 Takedownthebotnet.
Taking down botnets requires international cooperation. Initially, the botnet takedown rate was quite high
as they were easily disabled in the U.S. and Europe. Now, however, the takedown rate has reached a
steady state as new botnets are added as fast as existing ones are closed down. Botnet takedown has
become more complex as there are fewer botnets per ISP. More ISPs have to be contacted across
regions and languages, and there is no guarantee of cooperation. Expect to see a significant growth of
botnetsinthefuture.
5itsoknoproblembroDDoSThreatAdvisory
http://www.prolexic.com/knowledge-center-ddos-threat-advisory-itsok.html
3
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Summary
DDoS attacks areontherise.Theyhavebecomemorefrequent andare gaining insize. Toolkits suchas
itsoknoproblembroarebringingsophisticatedDDoStechnologytomoreandmorehackers.
CompaniesmustplanforunexpectedDDoSattacksbecausetheyarenotgoingtogoaway.
4
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com