Calculating Availability – Heterogeneous Systems Part 1
March2008
In all of our availability analyses to date, we have assumed that the nodes in a system are
identical. In particular, if there are n nodes in a redundant system, each with an availability of a,
and if the system can withstand the loss of s nodes, then the availability A of the system is given
by
nn1
A 1 (1a)s1 (1)
2
But what if the nodal availabilities are not the same? What if one node is in a safe area, and the
otherisinHurricaneAlleyinFlorida?TheFloridanodewillhaveanavailabilitylessthantheother
node because it stands to be destroyed by a hurricane at some time. What, then, is the
availabilityoftheredundantsystem?
In this article, we review some simple probability relationships necessary to analyzing this
situation and those like it. In our next article, we apply these relationships to heterogeneous
systems.
Probability 101
When it comes to availability, we are often concerned about binary states. For instance, we are
concerned about whether the state of a system is up (operational) or down (failed). This is a
binarystate–thestatementthatthesystemisupiseithertrueorfalse.
The value (true or false) of a binary state can be specified as a Boolean function with operators
AND,OR,andNOT.For instance, itmaybethatacertainstateis true if x AND yaretrueOR if z
isNOT true.Knowingtheprobabilitiesof x,y,and z,whatistheprobabilityofthe system beingin
thatstate?
Forinstance,inatwo-noderedundantsystem withNodes1and2,thesystem isupifNode1OR
Node2isup.Similarly,thesystemisupifNodes1AND2areNOTdown.
Let p(k) be the probability that k is true. These Boolean functions transform into the following
probabilityequations.
AND
TheANDoperatorimpliesmultiplication.TheprobabilitythatxANDyaretrueis
p(x ANDy)p(x)p(y) (2)
1
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

For instance, consider rolling a pair of dice. The probability of rolling a 2 is 1/6. The probabilityof
rolling afour is 1/6.Theprobabilityof rolling a2 onthefirstrollAND rollinga4onthesecondroll
is
p(2AND4)=p(2)p(4)=(1/6)(1/6)=1/36
Thechanceofrollinga2followedbya4isonetimein36tries.
OR
TheORoperatorimpliesaddition.TheprobabilitythatxORyistrueis
p(x ORy)p(x)p(y) (3)
x and y are taken from a set of events, any one of which can be true. Therefore, p(x)+p(y) is
necessarilylessthatone.
This can cause confusion. For instance, consider our pair of dice. The probability of rolling a
number greater than 1 is 5/6. Therefore, the probability of rolling a number greater than 1 on the
first throw OR rolling a number greater than 1 on the second throw is 5/6 + 5/6, or 10/6, right?
Wrong.Thisisaprobabilitythatisgreaterthanone,whichmakesnosense.
This demonstrates the need to set up probability equations properly. What we are really trying to
solveistheprobabilitythatthefirstrollwillbeanumbergreaterthan1ANDthesecondrollwillbe
a1,OR thefirstroll willbe a1AND thesecondroll willbegreater than1.Sincetheprobabilityof
rollinga1is1/6,thisresultsinaprobabilityof
p(rollinganumbergreaterthan1onthefirstrollORonthesecondroll)
=(5/6)(1/6)+(1/6)(5/6)=10/36
ortentriesoutof36.
This begs another question. Did we mean rolling a number greater than 1 on the first roll OR on
the second roll but NOT on both? Or did we mean rolling a number greater than 1 on either the
firstrollORthesecondrollORonboth?Theaboveequationsatisfiesthe“NOT both”condition.If
we are interested in the case that either or both of the rolls will be a number greater than 1, we
aretryingtocalculatetheprobabilitythat
 thefirstrollwillbeanumbergreaterthan1ANDthesecondrollwillbea1,OR
 thefirstrollwillbea1ANDthesecondrollwillbegreaterthan1,OR
 thefirstrollwillbegreaterthan1ANDthesecondrollwillbegreaterthan1.
Inthiscase,
p(rolling a number greater than 1 only on the first roll OR only on the second roll OR on
both)
=(5/6)(1/6)+(1/6)(5/6)+(5/6)(5/6)=35/36.
Note that the only case we have left out is the probability that both rolls will be a 1. This
probability is (1/6)(1/6) = 1/36. Thus, the probability of any occurrence is one, as we would
expect.
NOT
Theprobabilitythateventxisnottrueis
2
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

p(x NOTtrue)=p(NOT x)1p(x) (4)
This is obvious sinceevent Ais either trueor nottrue. Therefore,theprobabilitythatAis trueOR
theprobabilitythatAisNOTtrueisone.Thatis,p(A)+p(NOTA)=1.
For instance, if the probability of rolling a 1 is 1/6, the probability of NOT rolling a 1 is (1–1/6) =
5/6.
Wecanusethis tosolveoneof theprevious problems inanother way. Theprobabilityof rollinga
numbergreaterthan1oneitherrolloronbothrollsistheprobabilitythatbothrollswillNOTresult
in a 1. The probabilitythat both rolls will be a 1 is (1/6)(1/6) = 1/36. Therefore, the probabilitythat
both rolls will not result in a 1 is (1–1/36) = 35/36. This is the probability that a number greater
than1willberolledoneitherorbothattempts,asweconcludedabove.
Application to System Availability
Let us use these principles to review the simple case of
a two-node active/active system, which we have
analyzed exhaustively in previous articles. We take the
case of an active/active system comprising two nodes, Node1 Node2
availability=a availability=a
Node 1 and Node 2. Each node has an availability (the
probabilitythatitwillbeup)ofa.
We can use either of two techniques to calculate the
probability that the system will be up. This is the
system’savailability,A.Thesetwotechniquesfollow.
ThesystemwillbeupifbothNodes1AND2areNOTdown.
TheprobabilitythatNode1willbedownistheprobabilitythatitwillNOTbeup:
p(Node1isdown)=p(Node1isNOTup)=(1-a)
Likewise,
p(Node2isdown)=p(Node2isNOTup)=(1-a)
TheprobabilitythatbothNode1ANDNode2aredownis:
p(Node1ANDNode2aredown)=(1-a)2
Theavailability,A,ofthesystemistheprobabilitythatbothNodes1and2areNOTdown:
A=p(bothnodesareNOTdown)=1–p(bothnodesaredown)=1-(1-a)2 (5)
This is, of course, the availability equation for a two-node system with which we have been
working[seeEquation(1)forn=2ands=1].
ThesystemwillbeupifeitherNode1orNode2isup.
This can be expressed as the system will be up if both Nodes 1 AND 2 are up OR if Node 1
isupANDNode2isdownORifNode1isdownANDNode2isup.
Thisisthesamestatementasabovebutinadifferentform.Itleadstoadifferentanalysis.
3
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

TheprobabilitythatNode1isupisa.TheprobabilitythatNode2isupisalsoa.Thus,
p(Node1isupANDNode2isup)=a2
The probability that Node 1 is down is the probabilitythat it is NOT up and is (1-a). Likewise,
theprobabilitythatNode2isdownis(1-a).Thus,
p(Node1isupANDNode2isdown)=a(1-a)
p(Node1isdownANDNode2isup=(1-a)a
TheavailabilityofthesystemistheORofthesevalues,whichimpliessummation.Thus,
A=a2+2a(1-a) (6)
SomeObservations
TheValueofIntuition
Equation (6) looks strikingly different from Equation (5), yet they both represent system
availability. How can this be? A little algebraic manipulation will show that they both reduce to
a(2-a)andarethereforeequivalent:
Availability=a(2-a) (7)
Why, then, have we been using the more complex expression of Equation (5) in our availability
analysesratherthanthesimplerEquation(7)?Theanswer isthatEquation(5)is moreintuitive.It
comesdirectlyfrom thestatementthatthesystem will beupsolongas bothnodesarenotdown.
Theauthor,atleast,cannotintuitivelyexplainwhyEquation(7)istrue.
Itisfrom thesimplereasoningbehindEquation(5)thatwehaveintuitivelyderivedinourprevious
articles the effects of repair time, recovery time, restore time, failover faults, and many other
factorsthataffectavailability.
Approximations
In our analyses, we often eliminate terms to come up with reasonable approximations that are
simplerandmoreintuitive.However,thiscansometimesbeatrap.
Consider Equation (6) above. In the cases which we typically analyze, subsystem availability, a,
is often very close to one (.999 or higher). Therefore, (1–a) is very small. In Equation (6), we
could then reasonably conclude that the second term, 2a(1-a) is very much smaller than the first
term,a2,andcanbeignored.Thus,toareasonableapproximation,A=a2.
However, since a is always less than one, we would then conclude from this approximation that
adding a redundant node reduces system availability, which, of course, is not true. Sometimes,
the minor terms have major importance; and we have to be careful how we simplify expressions
into reasonable approximations. That is why we like to verify our intuitive approaches with formal
proofs. The use of failure state diagrams is one way to do this (see our Geek Corner series on
FailureStateDiagrams).
Summary
Asshownabove,wehavemultiplewaystolook atthesameproblem andcomeupwiththesame
answer intwo different forms.This is generallytrue inprobabilityanalyses.Therearemanyways
4
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

to look at a problem. One way is often more intuitive than another, and that is the one we use.
However, it is imperative that the probability equations be set up properly, and this is not always
immediately obvious. Furthermore, we have to exercise caution when we attempt to simplify our
resultsbyusingapproximations.
Inournextarticle, we willapplytheseratherelementaryprinciples tothecalculationofavailability
for systems with heterogeneous nodes. We will consider not only redundant systems that can
stand the failure of one or more nodes, but also serial systems that will fail if any one component
fails. An example of this sort of architecture is a tiered architecture in which the system will fail if
theapplicationlayerfailsorifthedatabaselayerfails.
5
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
