Banks Worldwide Suffer from IT Legacy
February2014
Banks around the world seem to be experiencing outages at an ever increasing rate. Lloyd’s
BankingGroupappearstobethelatestcasualty.
The Lloyds Banking Group Outage
On the afternoon of January 26, 2014, customers of the banks comprising Lloyds Banking Group could
not use their debit cards nor could they withdraw money from ATMs. The Lloyds Banking Group banks
include Lloyds, TSB, and Halifax. Hundreds of thousands of customers were left at checkout counters or
gas stations unable to pay for their purchases. The outage lasted from 3 PM to 7:30 PM. Once service
wasrestored,therewereadditionaldelaysasthebacklogoftransactionswascleared.
About one-quarter of card payments were affected, and half of all ATMs were down. Online and
telephonebankingserviceswerenotaffected.
According to sources, there was no maintenance or update activity going on at the time of the failure.
Rather, the failure was caused by two of seven servers that process debit-card transactions. Conjecture
is that one of the servers was a production server and the other was its backup. It appears that the bank
lostaserverandthensufferedafailoverfault.
The bank’s IT systems are a patchwork of dated systems cobbled together through acquisitions over the
recentyears.ItscoresystemisaUnisyssystemdatingfromthe1980s.
As a cost-cutting measure, Lloyds has cut IT staff and outsourced much of its IT support to India. Lloyds
madeitclearthatoutsourcingwasnotanissueinthefailure.
Following similar failures at other U.K. banks, the Financial Conduct Authority (the U.K. banking
regulatory body) has asked banks to name their IT leaders who can be held accountable in the event of
theirsystemsfailing
Royal Bank of Scotland
TheRoyalBank ofScotland(RBS)sufferedamuchmoreseriousoutageonCyberMonday,December2,
2013, the busiest online shopping day of the year.1 Millions of customers could not access cash via
ATMs. They could not use their credit cards or debit cards. They could not access their accounts via the
Webor viatheir mobileapps.Theoutageaffectedallof thesubsidiarybanks of RBS–notonlytheRoyal
BankofScotlandbutNatWestandtheUlsterbankaswell.
1RoyalBankofScotlandSuffersMultipleOutages,AvailabilityDigest;December2013.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0812/RBS_system_neglect.pdf
1
©2014SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Nospecific reason for the outage was given byRBS. However, astatementbyits CEO indicatedthat the
outage was the result of mergers and acquisitions. The RBS IT environment had become a patchwork of
systems that was becoming more and more difficult to maintain. For years, RBS had made little
investmentintheirITsystems,preferringinsteadtostrugglewiththeiraginginfrastructure.
This has led to a series of outages over the prior several months. In March of 2013, RBS, NatWest, and
Ulster Bank mobile applications went down for six hours. Customers could not access their accounts via
theirmobilephoneapps.Earlierintheyear,ATMsandallonlineaccessweredown.
The granddaddy of all outages hit RBS in June of 2012. It caused weeks of havoc. The outage was
caused by an upgrade gonemassively wrong. The bank had decided to upgrade its CA 7 batch facilityto
a new version. It found a problem with the new version and backed it out, returning to its current version.
However, in the process, the IT staff accidentally deleted a key control file that prevented the overnight
batchjobfromcompleting.
It took a week to pinpoint the cause of failure and to resume the batch run. However, during this time,
scheduledbillscouldnotbepaid,employerscouldnotpaytheir employees,andpensionerscouldnotget
theirpensionpayments.Interbanktransferscouldnotbemade,whichspreadtheproblemtootherbanks.
It took more than two additional weeks to work through the backlog of transactions that had accumulated
during the outage and to resolve all of the problems so that the systems could be returned to normal
operations.
Australia’s Painful Banking Outages
There have been a series of major outages at Australia’s four largest banks over the last two years.2The
National Australia Bank (NAB), Commonwealth Bank, the Australia and New Zealand Bank (ANZ), and
Westpachaveallhadtheir sharesofoutages affectingATMs,retailers’POSdevices,andonlinebanking.
Theoutages haveoccurred as thesehistoric banks engage inmulti-year replacements of their agingcore
legacy systems, some dating back to the 1980s. Apparently, these systems have become quite fragile in
theiroldage.
NationalAustralianBank(NAB)
November,2010
NAB clears payments for many other banks in Australia by conducting nightly batch runs on behalf of its
partner banks. A transaction-history file showing all payment activity for each bank is generated and is
senttothatbankbytheendofday.
Early on the morning of Wednesday, November 24, 2010, NAB’s partner banks went on high alert when
they did not receive their transaction files. Without these files, the banks had no record of the previous
day’s transactions that affected their customer accounts. Payroll deposits could not be made. Credit-card
payments werefrozen.Directdebits for billpaying wentintolimbo.Interbank paymentsceased.TheNAB
ATMs were down, as were its online banking services. Retailer point-of-sale terminals managed by NAB
wereuseless.Centrelinkwelfarepaymentscouldnotbemadetotheneediestfamiliesinthecountry.
It was reported that someone from NAB’s IT department inadvertently uploaded an erroneous file that
“corrupted” the system. The conjecture is that the file contained the instructions for managing the batch-
processingcycle.Itapparentlycausedmanytransactionstobeduplicatedandthebatchruntofail.
2Australia’sPainfulBankingOutages,AvailabilityDigest;March2012.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0703/australian_bank_outages.pdf
CommonwealthBankofAustralia–aCorrection,AvailabilityDigest;April2012.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0704/commonwealth_bank_correction.pdf
2
©2014SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

The problem did not last for hours. It lasted for days as customer accounts were reconciled. Some
problemscarriedoveralmosttwoweeksaftertheincident.
January,2011
A glitch in NAB’s secure login system took down telephone banking at 9 am on January 31, 2011.
Fortunately,securitywasnotbreached;andtelephonebankingwasrestoredsevenhourslater.
April,2011
Déjà vu. Just five months after its November, 2010, batch processing meltdown, NAB suffered a similar
outage. A problem in its overnight batch settlement system caused transaction files not to be delivered to
its partner banks. The problem took several hours to fix. Days passed before the bank could catch up on
theresultingbacklogandreconcileitscustomeraccounts.
February,2012
In February, 2012, NAB’s online banking services suddenly disappeared at 8:20 pm. NAB’s eight-million
customers nationwide were left without access to ATMs, Internet banking, telephone banking, and credit-
card services. Bills could not be paid online. Customers could not withdraw cash from their accounts.
Serviceswerenotrestoreduntilthenextafternoon,eighteenhourslater.
Westpac
March,2011
On March 3, 2011, some customers found that they could not log on to Westpac’s online banking
services. The problems were intermittent and seemed to move from customer to customer. Affected
customerscouldnottransferfunds,usetheircreditcards,orgetcashfromsomeATMs.
The problem was evidently due to server overload. Westpac reported that its servers were running at
80% of capacity during this time. Presumably, random customer attempts to use its online services were
timingout.
Then, just two weeks later, on March 15, 2011, Westpac suffered another outage. None of its customers
could log on to its online banking services. Online banking was down for an hour before services were
restored.
May,2011
OnthemorningofMay3,2011,oneofWestpac’sdata-centerairconditioningunitsfailed,andapparently
there was not enough spare capacity to carry the data center. Servers had to be shut down as
temperatures rose in the data center, causing a prolonged outage of the bank’s online banking services
and affecting all of its twelve-million customers. ATMs, credit/debit card use, and online banking services
disappeared for several hours until they were restored by late morning. Online banking took additional
timetorestore.
February,2012
On February21, 2012,Westpac was once again hit by a severe outage of its online services. Customers
could not get cash from ATMs and in some cases not even from the bank’s branches. Services were
down for several hours. The bank explained that it was in the process of upgrading its IT infrastructure
andthattheproblemwasduetoa“homepage”issue.
3
©2014SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

CommonwealthBank
December,2010
On December 14, 2010, Commonwealth Bank customers experienced intermittent outages in their online
bankingandATMtransactions.Commonwealthstatedthattheproblemswereduetoan“overduerunning
of a computer file.” It was those customer accounts that required data from the late running file that had
difficultyaccessingcashthroughATMsortransferringfundsviaonlinebanking.
March,2011
