Haiti’s Cellular Network Failure Cost Lives
March2010
The cost of system downtime can be measured in dollars, customer dissatisfaction, customer
loss, regulatory actions, or bad press. At the extreme, the failure of a safety-critical system can
result in loss of life. Sad to say, the Haitian cell-phone system proved to be a safety-critical
system;anditfailed.
Most Haitians have cell phones. They are inexpensive, and there is not much in the way of land
lines in Haiti. Following the devastating 7.0 earthquake that struck in the afternoon of Tuesday,
January 12th, many Haitians found themselves trapped in the rubble of fallen buildings. Some
were able to call on their cell phones, report their position, and were saved. How many tried but
couldnotgetcell-phoneserviceandperished,wewillneverknow.
Thisisthestoryofoneoftheworsttechnologicaldisastersinmoderntimes.
The Haitian Cell-Phone System
Many developing countries are skipping or minimizing a wired infrastructure in which telephone
service is provided by land lines. It has become much easier and simpler to set up a mobile
network by erecting towers rather than stringing cable. In addition, mobile networks are more
resilientandadaptabletochange.
Haiti is no different.1 Until the late 1990s, Haitian communications were land-line services
provided by Teleco, a telephone company that is 98% owned by the government. Teleco has a
monopolyonland-lineservice.Inthe1970s,Telecowasarevenuegeneratorforthegovernment.
Then the government started spending the profits on political campaigns and outright graft.
Today,Telecohasonlyabout100,000lines,only30,000ofwhichareworking.
Consequently,until1999, Haitihad virtuallynotelephoneservicefor its almosttenmillionpeople.
This began to improve when Haiti’s first privately-owned cellular company, Haitel, started offering
cell-phone service. It was joined later that year by Comcel, giving Haitians a choice of two
carriers.
However, Haiti is a very poor company. Few people could afford the $300 to $400 for a cell
phone. This changed upon the formation of a new, very aggressive, cellular carrier, Digicel, in
2006. Digicel revolutionized the Haitian cell-phone market by selling cell phones for $20 and
service for the equivalent of ten cents a minute. Even better, there were no contracts. Haitians
boughtminutes atkiosks oronline.If theyran out ofminutes,theycould not makecalls until they
purchasedmore;buttheycouldstillreceivecalls.
1TelecommunicationsinHaiti,Wikipedia.
1
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Haitel and Comcel quickly followed suit, and the Haitian cell-phone market exploded. Within one
year, cell-phone coverage grew from 6% of the population to 30% of the population - a 5:1
increase – and has been growing rapidly since. Haiti is now the driving force behind cell-phone
serviceintheCaribbean.
Today, Haitel has 200,000 subscribers on its 3G network; Comcel has 1,000,000 subscribers on
its GSM network; and Digicel, by far the largest carrier, has 2,000,000 subscribers on its GSM
network.DigicelandComcelcellularservicescovermostofHaiti.
Haitianslivebytheircellphones.
Then the Earthquake
Broad cell-phone coverage ended for the Haitian people on January 12, 2010, when a massive
7.0 earthquake hit Haiti. Following the earthquake, only the Haitel network survived. What
happenedtoDigicelandComcel?
InHaiti,therearenolocal anti-blight laws. Tosave costs,Digicel and Comcelbuilttheir networks
by placing small cell-phone towers on tops of buildings.2 These buildings collapsed during the
earthquake and the following aftershocks. The result was the widespread loss of cell-phone
service in Port-au-Prince, the capital of Haiti, which was the most severely impacted in terms of
property and loss of life. Digicel and Comcel services were similarly lost in many other cities and
towns that were severely damaged, but service continued in rural areas where the carriers had
used towers instead of buildings for their antennae. In total, almost 3,000,000 Haitians were
suddenlywithoutcell-phoneservice.
Haitel, on the other hand, had implemented its network using towers built to withstand
earthquakes and hurricanes. Its network survived the earthquake; but being the smallest network
in the country, it became quickly overloaded. However, Haitel subsequently had its own
problems.Itcouldnotsupplyfueltoitsemergencygeneratorsbecauseofdamagedstoragetanks
and impassible roads. A week and a half after the earthquake, its network was down. By this
time,DigicelandComcelhadmanagedtorestoresomeservice.ThoughHaitelsubscribers could
notmakecalls,theycouldreceivecallsfromDigicelandComcel.IttookHaitelanothertwoweeks
torestoreservice.
Network service was not the onlyproblem facing Haitian cell-phone users. Many depended upon
kiosks provided by the carriers to refresh their minutes. Most kiosks were destroyed in the cities,
and people could not purchase additional minutes unless they had an account with their carrier.
Thencell-phonebatteriesstartedtodrain,andtherewasnopowertorechargethem.
Even the Haitian government was affected. They do not have their own network. They depend
uponthecommercialservicesofthecellularcarriers.Therefore,theyhadnomeanstocoordinate
emergencyservicesfollowingtheearthquake.
Help Me. I’m Trapped!
The importance of the cell-phone service that remained was exemplified by the many lives that it
saved. People trapped in the rubble were able to call familyand give their whereabouts. Families
organizedrescueteamstoattempttofreetheirlovedones.
2MostofthematerialforthisarticlewastakenfromaninterviewwithHaitelengineerCharles-EdouardDenis,publishedin
theIEEESpectrum:
Anne-MarieCorley,WhyHaiti’sCellphoneNetworksFailed,IEEESpectrum;February,2010.
Thankstooursubscriber,PaulHolenstein,forpointingustothismaterial.
2
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

But how many people died because they could not communicate? With an estimated 200,000+
people killed by the earthquake, it is likely that these poor souls measured in the thousands. In
hindsight, the Haitian cell-phone network was an important safety-critical network. Unfortunately,
ithadnotbeendesignedassuch.
What About International Service?
The need for local communication was the most critical. However, families from around the world
werefranticallytryingtocalltheirlovedonesinHaiti;andHaitians weretryingtocalltheirfamilies
inothercountriestotellthemthattheyhadsurvived.
There is only one undersea cable connecting Haiti with the outside world, and it is not yet in full
commercialservicebecauseofhighcosts.Itisgovernment-ownedandoperatedandwasagiftto
TelecofromtheBahamianphonecompany.
Consequently,mostinternationalserviceis viamicrowave links totheDominicanRepublic,which
shares the island of Hispaniola with Haiti. In the Dominican Republic, Haitian traffic received is
routed internationally via undersea cables, which are in full operation. Microwave links are much
less costly than laying copper or fiber cable across the 9,000 foot-high mountains separating the
twocountries.Besides,microwavelinksarenotsubjecttovandalizingofthecopperinthecable.
However, the earthquake initially knocked out the microwave links. Microwave links are line of
sight, and the earthquake caused the microwave antennas to misalign. This was quickly
corrected,andinternationaltrafficwasrestoredshortlythereafter.
The world responded with cell-phone and satellite donations to Haiti. The cell phones were not
initiallyveryuseful,butthesatellitephonesprovedinvaluable.
In addition, help came from the two Haitian Internet ISPs, Access Haiti and Hainet. They link to
the Dominican Republic via microwave and managed to substantially survive the earthquake.
TheybothofferedfreeVoIPvoiceservicetotheU.S.,Canada,andEurope.
Lessons Learned
Clearly, theHaitiancellular network mustberebuilt.This canbeanopportunityto strengthenit.It
must be recognized that in a country like Haiti, reliable communications can mean the difference
between life and death for thousands of people following a disaster such as an earthquake or a
hurricane.Thenewsystemmustnotonlybereliablebutrecoverable.
Lesson number one is that the Haitian building codes may not reflect the stresses that disasters
such as earthquakes and hurricanes can put on buildings (such as the earthquake codes in
California and Chile that have also experienced disastrous earthquakes). Don’t put cell-phone
towers on buildings. Use earthquake- and hurricane-resistant cell-phone towers such as those
usedbyHaitel.
Haiti’s international service remained relatively intact because the microwave links to the
DominicanRepublicsurvived.Whatifthesehadbeendestroyed?Theultimateindisasterbackup
for communication links is satellite communications. Provisions should be made by the cellular
carriers to have backup satellite terminals and reserved satellite channels to which to switch
shouldtheirmicrowavelinksfail.Andwhataboutgettingthatoneunderseacableintoservice?
Don’t forget amateur radio. Hams can reach around the world today. Perhaps they ought to be
organizedtocreateaninternationalnetworkinanemergency.
3
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Another interesting thought proposed by a blogger3 addresses the problem of cellular network
overload in any emergency such as this. He submits that three seconds of voice is equivalent to
sending a full novel as text.Whynot restrict subscribers (all but designated emergency services)
totext-onlyfollowingamajordisaster?
And finally, there are the businesses. How many were prepared with their own disaster-recovery
plans for a disaster such as this? How many will be substantially impacted or even go out of
businessbecauseofthiscommunicationfailureorbecauseofotherimpactsoftheearthquake?
All this leads to the importance of business-continuity planning (BCP). In this case, the need for
BCP cut across the communication carriers, the government, and businesses. It seems that BC
planswerelackingorweresorelyinadequate.
3compro01,commentonDisasterRecoveryForHaiti’sCell-PhoneNetworks,Slashdot;January14,2010.
4
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com