Lloyds Banking Group Outage – a Correction
January2017
In our February, 2014, and April, 2015, issue of the Availability Digest, we described an
outage suffered by the Lloyds Banking Group. A subscriber to the Digest has pointed
outthatwewereinerror.Wecorrectthaterrorinthisarticle.
Ourearlierarticlesreportedthefollowing:
“TheLloydsBankingGroupOutage:
On the afternoon of January 26, 2014, customers of the banks comprising Lloyds Banking Group
could not use their debit cards; nor could they withdraw money from ATMs. The Lloyds Banking
Group banks include Lloyds, TSB, and Halifax. Hundreds of thousands of customers, left at
checkout counters or gas stations, were unable to pay for their purchases. The outage lasted
from 3PMto7:30PM.Onceservicewasrestored,therewereadditionaldelays asthebacklogof
transactionswascleared.
According to sources, there was no maintenance or update activity going on at the time of the
failure. Rather, the failure was caused by two of seven servers that process debit-card
transactions. Conjecture is that one of the servers was a production server, and the other was its
backup.Itappearsthatthebanklostaserverandthensufferedafailoverfault.”
These reports were based on incomplete information available at the time as well as some conjecture.
Oursubscriberhasreportedthatthefollowingisanaccuratedescriptionoftheoutage:
“TheLloydsBankingGroupOutage:
Lloyds employed two HP NonStop 16200 systems in an active/active configuration to process its
ATMandPOStransactions.Theoutage wascausedbyasimultaneousfailureoffouroutofeight
CPU processors in one of the NS16200 NonStop production servers, which handled 50% of all
ATMandPOStraffic.TheNS16200serverhandlingtheother50%oftrafficwasunaffected.
The root cause of the failure was finally identified by HP as a rare firmware bug in HP's Logical
Synchronization Module. The bug was so subtle that HP had to take the affected part back in
ordertoreproducethefailure.
Effectively, the failed server was still running at the point of failure but was ruled as "sick but not
dead."This resultedinabout50% of transactions failing.However, thesick system hadnotreally
failed, thus complicating the failover process. Automatic failover to the other half of the
active/active system did not take place. The transaction traffic had to be switched over manually
totheother(unaffected)HPNonStopserver.
1
©2017SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

As this issue caused a major embarrassment and adverse publicity for Lloyds, they sought legal
redressfromHP;butasettlementwaseventuallyreachedoutofcourt.
Lloyds subsequently migrated to HP NonStop NB56000 servers in August that year and updated
thedisasterrecoveryprocesstohandlethe“sick,butnotdead”serverscenario.
As this was an unusual type of failure, we are wondering whether there are manybusinesses out
there that maynot have ever thought through this type of failure event, let alone even planned or
testedforit?”
We are sure that most users of NonStop systems never consider the simultaneous failure of multiple
CPUs in a system. NonStop systems usuallyare configured so that theycan carry the anticipated load in
thepresenceofasingleCPUfailure.MultipleCPUfailuresrepresentafailureoftheNonStopsystem that
will require failover to an alternate system. Since most companies do not thoroughly test failover
procedures, the failure of the production system easily can lead to a failover fault that will take down all
services. This is probably what happened at Lloyds, “complicating the disaster recovery process” as our
subscriberreported.
Do yourfailovertestingproceduresincludethe“sick butnotdead”syndrome?Howdo youdeterminethat
a system is sick but not dead? One way would be to follow the lead of Lloyds. If a system appears to be
operational, but it is rejecting transactions, then it is likely “sick but not dead.” In this case, the system
mustbetakenoutofserviceanditstransactionsroutedtotheoperationalsystem.
Ourthankstooursubscriber(whowishestoremainanonymous)forthiscorrectionandclarification.Ifyou
feel that an article is in error, please get in touch with the Availability Digest editor at
editorest.comandletusknow.
2
©2017SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com