Mission-Critical Network Planning
September2009
A decade ago, end users were typically internal to the company. Now, heavy reliance on the
Internet has created an environment in which the bulk of users are outside of the company.
Employees can’t do much more than complain or file a trouble ticket. Customers can take their
business elsewhere. Matthew Liotine’s book entitled Mission-Critical Network Planning1
addressesthisnewcomplexity.
A better title for his book might have been Mission-Critical Continuity Planning. In his title, Liotine
includes in the term “network” anycomponent that might affect the continuity of a mission-critical
application–communicationnetworks,servers,storage,datacenters,power,andHVAC.
Each of these topics deserves a full volume (or more) on its own. Consequently, Liotine cannot
delve into great detail in his 400-page book on any of them. Rather, he gives an excellent
overview of all of the pertinent technologies involved in mission-critical systems, pointing the way
tomakingthem redundantforhighavailability.Eachtopicissupportedbyextensivereferencesto
otherpublicationsthatwillfillinthedetailifneeded.
As a result, this book is not intended to be a design guide for high availability. Rather, it provides
the background that one new to the field can use to become rapidly conversant in the various
technologiesinvolvedinhigh-availabilitydesign.Itisespeciallyusefultomanagerswhoarefaced
for the first time with converting their legacy systems to high-availability systems capable of
recoveringfromafaultinminutesratherthanhoursordays.
Principles of Continuity
Thefundamentalrequirementtoachievecontinuityis redundancy.Allsinglepointsoffailuremust
be eliminated. This requires that all critical components be backed up by an equivalent
component that, though not necessarily identical, can provide the same level of service as the
primarycomponent.
Simply providing a backup component is not enough. First, means must be provided to detect a
fault in a primary component. There must then be an adequate failover process to bring the
redundantelementintoservice.Redundantelementsshouldbegeographicallydispersedtoavoid
dual outages due to some common disaster; and they should not share any common resource,
thefailureofwhichcouldtakedownboththeprimarycomponentanditsbackup.
1
MatthewLiotine,Mission-CriticalNetworkPlanning,ArtechHouse;2003.
1
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

During the failure, the backup component represents a single point of failure. Therefore, the
repair of failed components must be done as quickly as possible, and the procedures to return
themtoservicewithminimalimpactonusersmustbeinplace.
Theauthordescribesseveraltypesofredundancy:
 kN,inwhichNresourcesarereplicatedasagroupktimes..
 N+k,inwhichkbackupsareprovidedforNresources.
 N+kwithkNredundancy,whicharecombinationsoftheabove.
He also distinguishes between fault-tolerant systems (which provide automatic recovery with no
data loss), fault-resilient systems (which provide automatic recovery with some data loss), and
high-availabilitysystems(whichminimizedisruptiveimpact).
Hethen proceeds to define the metrics of availability, including RTO (thetimetorestoreservice),
RPO (the amount of data that can be lost), the mean time before failure or the mean time to
failure (MTBF, MTTF), the mean time to repair (MTTR), and availability (the proportion of time
that a system is up). With respect to availability, he presents the equations to calculate the
availabilityof serialcomponents, in whichthefailure of anyone componentcauses the system to
fail, and parallel components, in which the system is operational so long as any of the
componentsareoperational.
Othermetricsincludecostmetrics(thecostofdowntime),capacitymetrics(utilization,bandwidth,
and overhead), and performance metrics (latency, response time, data loss, data errors, and
throughput).
The exposure metric measures the risk and the cost of threats, and is the product of the
frequency of the threat, the probability that the threat will cause a problem, and the cost if a
problemoccurs.
Communication Networks
NetworkTopologies
Chapters 4, 5, and 7 deal with communication networks. Various network topologies are
described, including point-to-point, bus, multipoint (a collection of point-to-point links that share
commonnodes),star,andstring.
These elemental topologies can be combined into more sophisticated topologies such as
meshes,rings,tiered,edge,andpeer-to-peernetworks.Meshesmayeitherbefullyconnected,in
which every node is connected by a point-to-point link to every other node, or may be only
partiallyconnected.Aringnetwork isessentiallyastringnetwork,thatis,aseries ofpoint-to-point
links,thatclosesuponitself.
A tiered network is hierarchical in that one or more master nodes connect to slave nodes, which
act as masters for lower-level slave nodes, until the end nodes are reached. To provide alternate
paths in the event of a node or link failure, a master may connect to multiple slave nodes, and
nodesatthesamelevelmayconnectwitheachother.
Edge networks are the end nodes of a network and are typically the users or another network.
Edge networks can be the most vulnerable points in a network because they are often
nonredundant.
Peer-to-peer networks allow peer services to interact. Thesenetworks canbeanycombinationof
theabovenetworks.
2
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Communication protocols are layered, with each layer feeding and being fed by its neighboring
layers. Layer 1 is the physical medium such as copper or fiber. Layer 2, the data-link layer, is
used to transmit data over the medium. Ethernet, ATM, and SONET are layer 2 protocols. Layer
3, the network layer, is the networking protocol that allows messages or packets to be delivered
to specific addresses. IP is a layer 3 protocol. Layer 4, the transport layer, ensures proper
orderingofmessagesandguaranteesmessagedelivery.TCPisalayer4protocol.
Each layer has its own protection and recovery mechanisms. Each higher layer protects against
unrecoverablefailuresinthelowerlayersandnotifieshigherlayersofnetworkproblems.
NetworkContinuity
LocalAreaNetworks
Local area networks (LANs) are a layer 2 technology. They are predominant for collocated
networks today because of their low cost, ease of use, and support by standards and a plethora
ofmatureproducts.ThemostcommonLANlayer2protocolisEthernet.
Ethernetisabustopology.Itcannotonitsownprovideredundantdatapaths norisitdesignedto
carry connection-oriented traffic. Data collisions are expected and may cause frequent
retransmissions as the load on the LAN increases beyond 20% or so. LAN segments should be
joined by switches and not hubs to minimize collisions, as switches will block traffic to LAN
segmentsforwhichthetrafficisnotdestined.
If redundant LANs are configured, theyshould be used in a load-sharing arrangement to improve
performanceandtofacilitatefailovershouldoneLANrailfail.
A virtual LAN, commonly known as a VLAN, is a group of hosts with a common set of
requirements that communicate as if they were attached to the same LAN regardless of their
physical location.2 A VLAN has the same attributes as a physical LAN, but it allows for end
stations to be grouped together even if they are not located on the same network.
Reconfiguration can be done through software instead of physically relocating devices. Virtual
LANs control traffic by segmenting it. Bursty or streaming traffic can be segregated so as not to
affectthequalityofothertraffic.
Other LAN devices include transceivers which connect devices to cable or fiber. Many
transceivers can connect a device to two links for backup. Media translators interconnect fiber or
copper links. Network adapters, also called Network Interface Cards (NICs), allow hosts and
users to connect to the network. Since NICs can be a single point of failure, each host or user
shouldconnecttothenetworkviatwoindependentNICs.
WideAreaNetworks
Wide area networks (WANs) are used for connecting end-points that are hundreds or thousands
of miles apart. Today’s Layer 2 protocols for a wide area network include frame relay, ATM
(AsynchronousTransferMode),andSONET(SynchronousOpticalNetwork).
Framerelayprovides permanentvirtualchannels (PVCs) forcustomers thatbehave as dedicated
connections even though they use a public network. Though backup PVCs can be configured,
their value may be questionable since the carrier already has significant redundancy in its
network.Ifthenetworkgoesdown,sodobothredundantPVCs.
2VirtualLAN,Wikipedia.
3
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

ATM provides higher bandwidth and better tracking of circuit availabilities than Frame Relay.
However,itismorecomplexandexpensive.
SONET provides optical networking over fiber. It may be arranged in a linear topology, though it
is usually implemented as a ring. In this way, if a node or a link fails, connectivity is still provided
inthereversedirection.Thus,SONETringsareinherentlyredundant.
SONET uses optical fiber to connect nodes. The earlier fiber links using a single light frequency
are being replaced with Wave Division Multiplexing (WDM), in which many signals are sent
simultaneously over the same fiber connection by using different light wavelengths, or colors. If
WDMisused,auto-repairisevenmorecriticalsincetrafficvolumeissomuchhigher.
Much of today’s WAN traffic is carried via the layer 3 Internet Protocol (IP) over the Internet. The
Internet is a global partially-connected mesh network in which traffic is directed via routers. The
layer3routersareintelligentdevicesthatcommunicatewiththeirneighborstocontinuallymonitor
the topology of the worldwide Internet so that they can choose the best paths and can route
aroundfailures.
There are many ways used to navigate an IP network. For routing within a company’s network,
the RIP (Routing Information Protocol) selects paths with the fewest hops (routers in the path).
TheOSPF (OpenShortest PathFirst) protocolselects themostefficientpath,includinghops,link
bandwidths,andotherparameters.
The VRRP (Virtual Router Redundancy Protocol) and the equivalent Cisco proprietary protocol,
HSRP (Hot Standby Routing Protocol), support automatic failover of redundant routers to which
usersdirectlyconnect.
For communicating betweennetworks intheInternetbackbone,the mostcommonprotocol is the
BorderGatewayProtocol(BGP).
Virtual private networks (VPNs) can be implemented over the public Internet by encapsulating IP
packets inthelayer 2packets (ATM,FrameRelay) or inother IPpackets.This technologyis also
called “tunneling.” A VPN acts as a private link that can have its own security. A VPN is a viable
alternativeasabackuptoadedicatedWANchannel.
When backing up a WAN, it is important that different carriers be used for each WAN, and that
these carriers not use some other common carrier whose failure could take down both the
primaryandbackupWANcircuits.Evenbetter,anentirelydifferenttechnologysuchassatelliteor
microwavecanbeusedforthebackupchannel.
MetropolitanAreaNetworks
Metropolitan area networks (MANs) lie betweenWANs and LANS. Theyare used to connect end
pointsinacampusorcity.TheytypicallycompriseGigabitEthernetovermultipleSONETrings.
NetworkAccess
Network access for voice services is typically via an in-house PBX (private branch exchange).
Today’s PBXs are often digital, and some now even use VoIP (voice over IP) to communicate
voice. They connect to analog or digital links to the central office and provide redundancy and
failover.
PBXs often comprise part of the network for data services as well. Especially if data is being
carried, it is important that the technology used to access the carrier’s backbone network is
redundant with fast failover. Ideally, redundant links should be aggregated and used as a single
4
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

logical link. If a link fails, it is simply removed from the aggregated group until it has been
repaired.
Wireless access is beingusedmoreandmorefor dataconnections.This technologyranges from
in-housewirelessLANstocellularnetworksandmicrowave(inruralareas).
Satellite links are a good choice for backup. Geostationary satellites provide the best quality of
service, but introduce significant latency because they are so high (20,000 miles). Medium and
lowearthorbitsatellitesintroducelesslatency,butchannelqualitymaybelessduetotheneedto
switchfromonesatellitetoanotherastheymoverelativetotheearth.
Servers
Chapters 6, 8, and 9 deal with the servers that provide the processing functions in a mission-
criticalnetwork.
ServerTopologies
A common topology for redundant servers is the cluster. In this regard, the author defines a
“cluster”intheverybroadsense.Acluster isagroupofinterrelatedcomputersthatwork together
to perform a variety of tasks. If one fails, another can take over. Clusters can include
multiprocessing clusters in which multiple CPUs in a single system share the load, fault-tolerant
systems in which two or more computers back each other up with instant failover, or server
clustersusingtwoormorelessexpensiveserverstoachievehighperformanceandavailability.
In whatever form, all processors in a cluster require access to the same data. This must be
provided redundantly to ensure availability. Redundant storage topologies include mirrored
storage in which the same data is recorded on two different storage media, RAID storage
(redundant arrays of independent disks) in which data is striped across several disks in such a
waythatitcanberecreatedshouldanyonediskfail,andnetworkstorage.
Failover within a cluster can range from hot failover to warm failover to cold failover. This gives a
rangeoffailovertimesandsystemcosts,withthefasterfailovertechnologiescostingmore.
Wide-area clusters add disaster tolerance to the reliability equation. An example given by the
authoristheIBMParallelSysplexsystem.
Given a cluster, it is important to be able to distribute the workload across the processors in the
cluster. This can be done with network load balancers that distribute traffic among the several
hostsviathenetwork.Alternatively,itcanbealoadbalancerthatdistributestraffictolocalhosts.
Traffic can be distributed randomly or according to predefined rules such as server load or
transactiontype.
Amajorclassofserversisthewebfarm.Properwebdesignisimportanttomaximizewebaccess
performance. Encryption, graphics, site design, the extent of distributed applications, and the ISP
areallfactors inthe performanceof awebsite. Sitenavigationshould be intuitivefrom theuser’s
viewpointratherthanareflectionoftheorganizationofthecompany.
When choosing an ISP, it is important to know the level of availability provided by the ISP. For
highavailability,anISPshouldconnecttoredundantbackboneproviders.Commonservicessuch
as DNS servers (Domain Name Services), which translate URLs to IP addresses, should be
redundantsoasnottobecomeasinglepointoffailure.
5
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Caching servers can be used to cache frequently-used web pages or other data to improve
access time. Forward proxy caching puts cache servers near the end-users. Reverse-proxy
servers put caching in front of the servers. Forward proxies can save bandwidth, and reverse
proxies can act as firewalls. Caching servers reduce response times. They also increase
redundancybecausetheycanprovideresponsestodatarequestseveniftheprimaryserversare
