slave slave
apps replicator DBMS Oracle
MySQL
PostgreSQL
SQLServer
Oracle slave slave DB2
MySQL master replicator DBMS
DBMS
PostgreSQL
slave XML
change replicator
logs*
*redologsforOracle
master binlogsforMySQL
replicator
TungstenHeterogeneousReplication
MySQL and PostgreSQL masters and any slaves, Oracle included, can run on any platform that
supportsJava.Currently,LinuxandWindowsplatformshavebeencertifiedbyContinuent.
Ifreplicationisheterogeneous,onlyrowreplicationmaybeused.Inaddition,rowsmustcontaina
primary index. To account for differences in schema in different databases, user-provided filters
written in Java or Java Script maybe incorporated into the Tungsten Replicator to filter rows and
to modify, delete, add, or modify columns in the slave database. In addition, modules can be
writtentoallowreplicationtounsupportedtargetssuchasapplications,messagequeues,andflat
files.
Configurations
TheTungstenReplicatorcanbeconfiguredinmanywaystoachieveavarietyofobjectives.
Scale-Out/DisasterTolerance
Master/slave configurations are useful for
scaling applications that are read-intensive. slave
updates DBMS
One master may feed many slaves. Read
requests are distributed among the slaves to siteA
balancetheloadacrossthesystem.
master slave reports
DBMS DBMS queries
Capacity expansion is straightforward. New
siteB
slaves can be easily added to increase the
capacity of the system. Likewise, slaves can slave
DBMS
be removed if capacity requirements should
shrink. siteC
Scale-Out
The slave databases can be geographically
distributed to provide local database access to remote communities of users. Geographical
distribution also provides disaster tolerance. Inthe eventthatthemaster siteshouldbeputout of
commission,aslaveat aremotesitecanbepromoted tomaster,allowing thesystem tocontinue
toprovideuserservices.
5
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Chaining/DataLocality
Slave databases can be chained. With chaining, a slave
slave slave database can act as a master database to one or more
DBMS DBMS
subservient slave databases. Changes made to it are in
master turnreplicatedtootherslaves.
DBMS
slave
With chaining, communication costs between
DBMS
geographically-distributed slaves can be minimized. This
encourages the use of slave systems to provide data
Chaining
locality to remote communities of users. Though user
updatesmustbeforwardedoverthenetworktothemasterdatabase,readscanbeexecutedbya
slave at or near a user community, thus significantly improving read performance by eliminating
communicationlatency.
Master/Master
Tungsten supports partitioned active/active systems by allowing multiple sites to actively
participate in the same application. At each site is a master database and one or more slave
databases. In this configuration, the database must be partitioned so that each master ‘owns” a
particular partition. Only the partition owner can update that partition. Tungsten does not support
unpartitioned master/master configurations because it does not handle data collisions that occur
whentwositesupdatethesamedataobjectatthesametime.
Eachsitehasoneormorecopiesofitspartitiononslavesystemsatothersites.Updatesmustbe
routed to the site containing the master database for the partition to be updated. After applying
theupdates,thatmasterreplicatesthechangestoitsslavebackupsatothersites.
read/
write
apps
SQLRouter
requestrouting
partitionA updates partitionB
operations operations
master master
partition partition
A B
read backup backup read
only partition partition only
apps B A apps
siteA siteB
PartitionedActive/Active
To support this configuration, SQL Router is being enhanced to provide update transaction
routing. SQL Router will analyze each SQL statement, will determine whether it is an update
operation,andifso,willrouteittotheappropriatemasterowningthepartitiontobeupdated.
6
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Iftheoperationisareadoperation,SQLRouterdeterminestowhichslavedatabasetosenditfor
execution. Therefore, all databases in the application network are effectively used. Both reads
andupdatesaredistributedacrosstheapplicationnetworkformaximumperformance.
SQL Router currently handles the proper serialization of transactions and configures around
networkfailures.
As an active/active system, this configuration also provides high availability. Should a master
node fail, the master database at another site is assigned the partition originally owned by the
failed master. SQL Router will now route all updates for the failed partition to the partition’s new
master,thusguaranteeingcontinuousoperation.
Fan-In/DataWarehousing
The Enterprise edition of Tungsten supports fan-in, in
which multiple master databases can replicate to one or in-store
more slave databases. With Tungsten’s transformation sales
and filtering capabilities, the unique schema of each of the
independent masters can be modified on-the-fly to match
online
theschemaoftheslavedatabases. sales
data
This fan-in capability is especially important to create data
warehouse
warehouses and data marts. Since Tungsten replication
occurs in near-real time, this means that the data inventory
warehouses can be used not only for classical strategic
data mining but for tactical real-time business intelligence
aswell.Typicalreal-timebusinessintelligenceapplications
shipping
include fraud detection, instant promotions to online or in-
storecustomers,andrapidproductreordering.
Real-TimeDataWarehouse
Zero-DowntimeUpgrades
The fact that there are two or more current copies of the database in the application network
allows upgrades to be made without denying service to the system’s users. This applies to
hardware,operatingsystem,application,anddatabaseupgrades.
read/ read/ read/
write write write
apps apps apps
master upgrade slave master upgrade master
MySQL MySQL MySQL MySQL MySQL MySQL
4.1 5.0 4.1 5.0 5.0 5.0
upgradeslave testupgrade upgradeoldmaster
Zero-Downtime Upgrades and Migrations
Zero-downtime upgrades are accomplished by rolling upgrades through the system, one node at
a time. The process is started by taking a slave node offline. This node is then upgraded and is
promoted to master, forcing the original master to now be a slave node. Replication is initiated
from the new master to the new slave so that a failback capability is created. Since Tungsten
supports data transformations during the replication process, there is no problem in replicating
fromanewlyupgradedsystemtotheoldsystemrunningonthenodethatisnowtheslave.
7
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

The upgrade can be thoroughly tested in this new configuration. If there is a problem, the roles
can be reversed and the upgrade problem corrected. If the upgrade works properly, the current
slavenode is takenoffline, upgraded, andreturnedto serviceas theslave.Theroles can now be
reversedonceagainifitisdesiredtoreturntotheoriginalmaster/slaveconfiguration.
FaultRecovery
Tungsten implements fault recovery via virtual IP addressing. All applications send updates to a
virtual IP address that is owned by the current master node. The master also sends heartbeat
messagestotheslavenodes.
Should a slave node fail to receive a heartbeat from its master node, it informs the Tungsten
Manager of this situation. Using the Hedera group communications facility, the Tungsten
Manager will determine if the problem is a real failure of the master node or, instead, a network
problem.
If it is determined that the master has, in fact, failed, the Tungsten Manager will determine which
slaveisthebestcandidatetobethenewmaster.Itmightdothisbychoosingtheslavethatisthe
most up-to-date or by choosing a slave based on an established priority. Tungsten Manager will
direct that slave to assume the virtual IP address and will promote it to master. The applications
are unaware of this change and simply keep sending update requests to the virtual IP address
andthustothenewmaster.
Thisfailoverscenarioisnottrivial.Thefailureofthemastermustfirstbedetected.Thebestslave
to be promoted to master must be determined, and all of the other slaves must be notified of this
promotion. The other slaves must then reconnect to the new master. To solve this problem,
Continuentprovidesafully-integratedfailovercommandaspartofTungstenEnterprise.
By geographically separating the master and slave nodes, this failover capability provides full
disastertolerancefortheapplicationnetwork.
Continuent
Continuent is a privately-funded company with a strong Nordic heritage. Its corporate office is in
SanJose,California.IthasasalesofficeinEspoo,Finland.
Continuentproducts areusedbysuchcompanies as Capgemini,Telstra,Sonoma,Thomson,La-
Z-Boy,Alcatel-Lucent,CNETNetworks,andNOAA.
8
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com
