primaryserverwillnotcauseafailover.
BackupServerFault
If a fault is detected in the backup server, there is no impact to the users. A fault such as the
failure of a disk in a RAID array or the failure of a power supply (if the server has dual power
supplies)simplyresultsinaCallHomeforareplacementpart.Thebackupstaysinservice.
ShouldthebackupserverexperienceaVMfailure,theVMisrestarted.
Amoreserious fault suchas thefailure of anetwork adapter leading to the loss of connectivityto
a public network or a server crash will cause the backup server to reboot. There is a chance that
such a fault is transient and will be cured by a reboot. However, if the calculated mean-time-
before-failure of the failing component drops below a specified threshold, the backup server will
bedeclareddown.
NoncriticalPrimaryFailure
If the primary server should experience a noncritical failure, such as a power supply failure in a
server with dual power supplies, a Call Home report will be sent. The failover to the backup
serverwillbegin,asdescribedbelow,solongasthebackupserverisinbetterhealth.
PrimaryPublicNetworkFailure
Should the primary server lose its connection with a public network, communication will continue
byusingtheprivatelink tomakeuseofthebackup’snetwork connection.Afailovertothebackup
serverwillbeinitiated.
PrimaryDiskFailure
If a disk on the primary server should fail, Avance will use the synchronized copy of the disk on
thebackupserver byaccessingitviatheprivatelink.Avance will initiatethefailover procedureto
thebackupserver,asdescribedlater.
Private-LinkFailure
Shouldtheprivatelinkfail,thesystemisrunninginsplit-brainmode.Boththeprimaryandbackup
servers are still operational, but theycannot talk to each other. An attempt is made to correct the
problem by rebooting the backup server just in case this is a transient software problem. After
repeated attempts, if the calculated mean-time-before-failure exceeds a specified threshold, the
backupserverisdeclareddown.
5
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

PrimaryVMFailure
IfaVMshouldfailontheprimaryserver,itissimplyrestarted.
PrimaryServerCrash
The most catastrophic fault is the crash of the primary server. All work in progress is, of course,
lost.Thebackupserver takes over processing. However,though allof thesoftwareis loadedand
readytogo onthebackupserver,the VMs mustbebootedandtheapplications started.This can
typicallytakeontheorderofthirtysecondstotwominutes.
This is downtime that is observable to the users. In addition, during a primary-crash recovery,
Avancedoes notpreserve user connections.However,manyof theISVproducts aredesignedto
automaticallyreconnectwhenthebackupservercomesintoproduction.
TheFailoverProcess
Avancewilldecidetofailovergracefullytothebackupserveriftheprimaryserver’shealthshould
become less than that of the backup server. Failover is a very controlled process and is
substantiallytransparenttotheuser.Failoverproceedsasfollows.
First, the software state for each VM is migrated from the primaryserver to the backup server by
copying its memory over the private link. Avance keeps track of which memory pages have
changed and copies only those pages. Memory copying is done in the background, and users
continue to be serviced by the original primary server. Software state migration occurs
simultaneouslyandindependentlyforeachVM.SomeVMswillcompletebeforeothers.
Whenmostof thememoryfor aVMhas beencopied, the VM is paused whilethe final pages are
copied (to prevent continued changes to pages). The VM on the backup server is then started;
and the application continues on the backup server, which has now become the primary server
forthatVM.Theuserconnectionsarepreservedduringthefailoverprocess.
This process typically takes about ten seconds per gigabyte of memory used by the VM.
However, it is transparent to the users. The only user impact is at the end of the copy for a VM
when processing is paused while the new VM is started. This time is typically fast enough to
generallybetransparenttousers.
EliminatingPlannedDowntime
The Avance failover process can be used to eliminate planned downtime by rolling upgrades
through the system. To upgrade the servers to new software versions or to upgrade the
hardware,allthat needs tobedoneis tofirsttakedownthebackupserver,upgradeit,andreturn
it to service. The failover process is then used to switch the primary and backup roles, and the
otherserveristhenupgraded.
Exceptforthebriefswitchoverpause,thisupgradeprocessistotallytransparenttotheusers.
Recovery
When a failed server is to be returned to service, the Avance software must be reloaded and the
database of the failed server resynchronized with the primary server. Avance will automatically
migrate the VMs and the applications from the primary server to the server being restored. It can
thenbeputintooperationasthebackupserver.
Depending upon the size of the database, database resynchronization can take a few hours, but
theusersarerunningoffoftheprimaryserverduringthistime.
6
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Monitoring
Operatorerrorsarethepredominantcauseofsystem downtimeinredundantsystems.Therefore,
Avance provides a system monitor that is aimed at reducing operational steps. In fact, once
Avanceis installedandrunning,thereis noneedfor anyoperator actionthat wouldnototherwise
beneededforasingleserver.
Avance’smonitor provides asingle-system imageoftheAvancesystem.Sofarastheoperatoris
concerned,heisdealingwithasingle,industry-standardserver.
Themonitor shows thecurrentstatus of thehardware components,theVMs,and thenetworks.It
displays faultinformationdowntothecomponentlevel.Generally,thereis nooperator actionthat
is required except for hardware-component replacement, as Avance handles all faults
automatically. It will automatically alert operations personnel by email if there is a problem that
requiresattention.
The monitor also maintains a log of all automatic actions undertaken by Avance and of all user
actions.
The monitor is browser-based and is intended to be used remotely. Therefore, there need be no
ITstaffpresentatanAvanceinstallation.Onlyauthorizedpersonnelcanusethemonitor.
Installation
Avance is designed to simplify and minimize the installation process. The first step is to install
Avance on each server. Avance installation requires that the user answer only one optional
question – whether or not to change the default IP address of the server, if desired. Avance
installsintentofifteenminutes.
TheVMsmustthenbesetup.IttakesabouttwominutestocreateeachVM.Theguestoperating
systemsmustthenbeinstalled.ThistakesaboutfivetotenminutesforLinuxandabouttwentyto
thirty minutes for Windows. If multiple VMs use the same guest operating system, that operating
systemneedonlybeinstalledonce.
As each VM is created, the user specifies the resources that it will use. They include the number
of cores, the amount of memory, the disk capacity, and the number of disk spindles. The servers
used to configure Avance do not have to be identical. However, the smallest server must be
sufficient to host all of the running VMs. Note that with the capability to roll upgrades through the
systemwithoutaffectingusers,theAvanceserverscanbeupgradedatanytime.
Purchasing Avance
Stratus sells Avance directly to large customers. In addition, value-added ISVs are integrating
Avance into their own products; and system integrators are incorporating Avance into their
serviceofferings.
AnAvancesystem canbelicenseddirectlyfrom Dell.AnAvancelicensecosts$2,500perserver.
In addition, Windows and/or Red Hat Linux licenses are required for each server. CentOS, being
opensource,carriesnolicensefee.
7
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Availability Choices – Good, Better, Best
Avance complements Stratus’ fault-tolerant offering, ftServer, which recently has exhibited over
six 9s availability in field measurements (an average downtime of 30 seconds per year).3 With
Avance’s four 9s of availability, companies have a choice of a range of availabilities and costs. A
simpleexamplewillservetoillustratethis.
First,though,wewouldliketocommentonStratus’claim ofanAvanceavailabilityofgreaterthan
four 9s. An availability of four 9s translates to 48 minutes per year of downtime. Given that
Avance soft failovers impose barely perceptible downtime., and hard failovers take the system
down for about two minutes, it is difficult to see how an Avance system could have that much
downtime. Stratus says that it is simply being conservative until it has enough field experience
with Avance to give a more accurate value. We at the Availability Digest suspect that the actual
Avance availability will approach five 9s, or five minutes per year of downtime. In the following
example,wewilluseanestimateofAvancedowntimeoftenminutesper year.
Let us assume that a company is running an industry-standard x86 server with a sales price of
$3,500. It would like to move to a high-availability environment by buying a backup server. The
company estimates that the primary server will fail an average of twice per year and that the
failover to the backup server will take two hours. The company now has three high-availability
options:
Value Configuration Downtime Cost
Good Active/Backup–twoservers 4hoursperyear $7,000
Better Avance–twoserversplustwoAvancelicenses 10minutesperyear $12,000
Best ftServer 30secondsper year $25,000
The proper availability option depends upon the cost to the company of downtime. In this
example, if downtime cost is insignificant, it should probably stick with an active/backup
configuration.If thecostofdowntimeis $1,000per hour,Avance willpayfor itself inalittleover a
year. If the cost of downtime is $40,000 per hour, ftServer will pay for itself after the first server
failure in an active/backup configuration. Compared to an Avance system, ftServer will pay for
itselfinthiscaseintwoyears.
Since many Edge applications have a downtime cost measured in thousands of dollars per hour,
Avanceiswell-positionedtopayforitselfrapidlyintheseenvironments.
About Stratus
Stratus is the leading provider of high-availability and fault-tolerant products for industry-standard
servers. Located in Maynard, Massachusetts, in the U.S., Stratus has been delivering fault-
tolerant systems since 1980. Starting with its classic Continuum servers, which provide five 9s of
availability, Stratus’ current offerings of its four-9s Avance and its six-9s ftServer give it a broad
portfolioofhigh-availabilityandfault-tolerantproducts.
Stratus also provides high-availability professional, management, and support services through
itsCALM(ContinuousAvailabilityLifecycleManagement)portfolio.
Summary
Avance brings high availability to the Edge – the branches and small businesses that to date
have been reluctant to invest in high-availability environments. Avance is a software product that
sits on a pair of standard x86 servers interconnected by a dedicated Ethernet link. It uses
3ThisincludesStratushardwareandsoftwareincidents.SeeStratus’AvailabilityMeteronwww.stratus.com.
8
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

predictive fault detection and can protect itself from most faults with little if any impact on the
users of the system. In addition, it provides a virtualized environment that can support up to eight
virtualmachinesrunningWindowsorLinuxasguestoperatingsystems.
If the cost of downtime of an Edge application is as little as $1,000 per hour, Avance can pay for
itselfveryquickly,perhapsinayearorso.
9
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

