Record-breaking heat proving to be taxing for California electrical grid
In June, thousands of residents of the U.S. State of California were left without power. The state-
wide outage occurred during a record-breaking heat wave that overstressed the power grid.
https://t.co/GwqnZtPFTP
Facebook is planning to move WhatsApp off IBM's public cloud, source says
Facebook's WhatsApp messaging service, which is used by 1.2 billion people across the globe, is
planning to move off of IBM's cloud and into Facebook's own data centers. The WhatsApp move,
which could begin later this year, will result in IBM losing a high-profile customer for its public cloud.
A source claims that WhatsApp has been one of IBM's top five public cloud customers in terms of
revenue and was at one point spending $2 million a month with IBM.
https://t.co/Cbbzd6ViE1
Why do legacy and cloud mix well?
Scott Jeschonek, Director of Cloud Solutions at Avere Systems, thinks that while oil and water don’t
mix, legacy and cloud do in comparison. In spite of the hype about moving applications to the cloud
and about turning legacy applications in cloud-natives, he finds that legacy systems are alive and
well; and he believes they aren’t going to go anywhere anytime soon.
https://t.co/r47meWEQH7
CIOs say IT can better back up their organizations
CIOs say there is always a struggle when deciding to invest in improving legacy systems versus
implementing new, innovative technology. They say it is a tough job. They say that disaster recovery
and business continuity plans often end up at the bottom of the budget priorities list. At the same
time, they assert that IT cannot be the endpoint here. Business continuity means training the entire
business to respond.
https://t.co/luFyVw2AMa
5
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

A Republican voter data firm likely exposed your personal information for days — and
you don't have much recourse
To any nefarious hackers looking for information that could be used to sway elections or steal
Americans’ identities, the file compiled by a GOP data firm called Deep Root Analytics offered all
manner of possibilities. There in one place was detailed personal information about almost every
voter in the U.S. It was a collection of some 9.5 billion data points that helped the firm assess not
only how those Americans would probably vote but also their projected political preferences. It’s the
kind of sensitive information that if a bank or a big-box retailer or almost any other corporation had
failed to protect it, would have triggered major trouble with regulators. But there it sat on the Internet
without so much as a password to guard it - for 12 days.
https://t.co/4GJAvcMVJr
US government awards millions to HPE, Intel, and others in hopes they’ll build next-gen
supercomputers
To try and edge the United States ahead of other countries in the arms race of building
supercomputers, the Department of Energy recently awarded a total of $258 million in funding to
HPE, Cray, AMD, Intel, IBM, and Nvidia. The money will be put toward developing exascale
computers, which are capable of a billion calculations per second. The $258 million in funding will be
allocated over a three-year contract period. Each company also agreed to provide at least 40
percent of their individual total project costs for a total investment of $430 million.
https://t.co/6qyLKC1kvu
It's time to update XP, Windows Server 2003 despite Microsoft's emergency patch
Microsoft ended support for Windows XP in April 2014 and Windows Server 2003 in July 2015, but there
are still over 100 million legacy Windows systems still in use around the world. It makes perfect sense,
then, to worry about the possibility of widespread attacks against legacy systems when ShadowBrokers
revealed three hacking tools utilizing vulnerabilities in older versions of Windows.
https://t.co/HxjosWsFNh
The History of APIs and How They Impact Your Future
It’s hard to imagine what the world would be like without APIs, but it’s safe to say that our everyday
lives would look very different without this concept at work behind so much of the technology we
take for granted. In this article, we’ll delve into API history and look at industry-specific examples of
how API integration fuels today’s innovations. Whether you’re an IT manager, developer or someone
simply working in the industry who is curious about this topic, the following will tell you everything
you need to know about the history.
https://t.co/9w36LwycXt
Banking glitches a growing trend globally
During June’s “internal data processing error” of the Bank of Philippine Island (BPI), some of its account
holders saw their balance statements ending more than double (P600 to P600,000) or to a preposterously
high level of P12 billion. That was the surprise “fun” part, especially for those who saw their balances
change for the “better.” But for those that saw their account balances bottom out or even change to
negative, it definitely was horrific. And with social media at its best behavior nowadays, BPI’s internal
glitch turned out to be an overnight sensation.
https://t.co/6SXd7ZO0eo
6
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Why can’t security have SLAs?
You always hear about the five-nines. The typical amount of time laid out in a service-level agreement that
a network should be online. Can that same premise pertain to security? Vendors say no. Despite that
sentiment, let’s play a game of what-if. What if a parameter could be placed on a third party for security?
What would it look like?
https://t.co/5rLzwNuWgx
Modernizing Core Architectures in the Digital-Transformation Economy
We’ve heard the term digital transformation used almost to the point of exhaustion in the past couple
of years, but it’s not just a lot of hot air: it’s the future. It is predicted that digital transformation will
attain macroeconomic scale over the next three to four years, changing the way enterprises operate
and reshaping the global economy. According to research company IDC, “By 2020, 50 percent of the
Global 2000 will see the majority of their businesses depend on the ability to create digitally
enhanced products, services and experiences.”
https://t.co/ZIyQXOyXqT
True Story of the Microgrid that the Navy Built - Electric Light & Power
So much of today’s discussions around microgrids have made the concept seem complex,
expensive, and infeasible without generous government support. But in truth, microgrids—defined
here as islandable loads connected to onsite power resources—have existed long before the term
itself gained traction in the late 1990s. The benefits of resiliency and islanding capability far exceeds
their cost: in short, these microgrids work. Even as we look at contemporary, renewable-powered
microgrids, we find many examples of inexpensive and effectively islanded power networks.
One example of this is the modest microgrid at IMPEL, the Integrated Multi-Physics Energy
Laboratory at the Naval Postgraduate School (NPS) in Monterey, CA.
https://t.co/Ui7VlE6EcD
Quake-Prone Pacific Rim Cities Upgrade to Recover Quickly
Earthquakes are a fact of life in Pacific Rim countries, but most are small shocks that don't do much
damage. But a major quake - one registering more than 6.0 on the open-ended Richter scale - can
devastate communities, even those that have prepared for disaster. In many urban centers around
the Pacific Rim, it could be weeks or a month - or more - before water service gets restored after a
major earthquake - not to mention electricity, sewage and fuel supplies too. Therefore, leaders on
both sides of the Pacific are being forced to make cost-benefit choices.
https://t.co/jwCdgUVr9M
IT Resiliency: A move beyond simple DR
The IT industry is no stranger to buzzwords. Poke around most technology websites, and you’ll find
industry jargon galore. Occasionally, one term pushes through the noise, becoming a topic that is on
everyone’s agenda. IT resiliency is most definitely the new kid on the block, having permeated the
minds of IT professionals and C-suites alike. So what actually is it, and why should we care?
https://t.co/CX5QS3Tdo0
7
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Avoiding an outage disaster: continuous availability
The IT failure that caused chaos for thousands of passengers travelling on British Airways could
have been avoided with a continuous availability architecture.
https://t.co/Tgh4CPqDom
‘These Are Historic Days’. Russian Scientist to Launch Data Centre Into Orbit
A Russian businessman is readying to launch a data centre into space in August this year in what is
certainly one of the most ambitious projects the data centre industry has seen in recent times. The
project is part of a much larger idea which started in 2016 with the announcement of the
development of a pacifist nation-state in space.
https://t.co/A4C1afL4fW
The hidden cost of “Dark DR:” The economic argument for active/active operations
For decades, Disaster Recovery (DR) has dominated the landscape as the best architecture for
business continuity. The problem is that DR expects you to have a disaster and then to recover from
that disaster. Because that capacity sits idle until disaster strikes, many customers call that “Dark
DR.” In today’s digital business world, of course, disasters aren’t tolerated well. A majority of
organisations cite considerable loss to revenue and/or reputation if their online offerings go down.
Rather than build DR structures, organisations today need to design for Continuous Availability.
Continuous availability, in turn, requires active/active architectures.
https://t.co/EyRtIrsrcf
ATO warned about HPE hardware failure six months before meltdown
The Australian Taxation Office (ATO) is rebuilding its internal IT infrastructure capability after two
outages of its outsourced storage environment exposed poor system design and maintenance. Most
of the high-level technical causes and system design issues for the December 2016 outage were
revealed in June, including improperly fitted cables, inactive monitoring tools, and a SAN design that
promoted performance over stability and resilience. It also was revealed that the second major
meltdown in February was the result of human error as HPE technicians tried to replace SAN
cabling. One damaging revelation is that the SAN configuration had been experiencing issues for six
months prior to the first meltdown and that the ATO had been kept in the dark over the severity.
https://t.co/PoCaecJmYU
Linux server attack: Patch Samba or risk cryptocurrency mining malware
Attackers are free-riding Linux servers with an unpatched Samba bug to mine for the monero
cryptocurrency. Instead of installing ransomware, the Samba attackers install a cryptocurrency miner
to turn a profit from Linux machines in the form of the monero, an alternative to bitcoin that is less
computationally demanding to mine.
https://t.co/wLDctMiuoV
8
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Researchers have found the first real-world malware that attacks physical infrastructure
since Stuxnet
A week before last Christmas, hackers struck an electric transmission station north of the city of
Kiev, blacking out a portion of the Ukrainian capital equivalent to a fifth of its total power capacity.
The outage lasted about an hour—hardly a catastrophe. But now cybersecurity researchers have
found disturbing evidence that the blackout may have only been a dry run. The hackers appear to
have been testing the most evolved specimen of grid-sabotaging malware ever observed in the wild.
https://t.co/pscLd32QIX
Hit-and-Run Drone Collision Causes Power Outage for 1,600 in Google’s Hometown
The increasing prevalence of drones in our skies and streets is going to usher in some spectacular
benefits as well as some unintended consequences. The technology is already way ahead of the
law. In June, 1,600 people in the Silicon Valley city of Mountain Vi8ew lost their electricity when a
man flew a drone into a high-voltage wire. The power outage lasted about three hours and cost
“tens of thousands of dollars.”
https://t.co/qTJf2sHyrf
9
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

