Other Network Parameters
Redundancy isn’t the only consideration when configuring a network for an active/active system.
Equally important parameters are the provided bandwidth, the channel latency, and the error
rates of the channel. They should all be specified in the Service Level Agreements (SLAs)
negotiatedwiththecommunicationcarriers.
Bandwidth
Needless to say, the bandwidth of the communication channels must be sufficient to carry the
communication load. Furthermore, sufficient bandwidth must be provided so communication
delayscausedbyqueuingofmessageswaitingtogettothechannelareacceptable.
This typically means that the bandwidth of each communication channel should be twice (or so)
of the maximum transmission rates expected (this leads to an average message-queue length of
onemessage).
It maybe desirable to specifythat a certain percentage of messages will not be delayed bymore
than a specified amount of time. For instance, one might want to specify that 99% of all
messages be delivered within 100 milliseconds. This requires a more critical evaluation of
performance and queuing to arrive at the bandwidth that will be required. Reference is made to
Configuring to Meet a Performance SLA – Part 3, Availability Digest; February, 2009, for the
techniquestomakethisbandwidthcalculation.
4
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

ChannelLatency
Channel latency is the amount of time that it takes for a message to travel from the source
system to the target system over the communication channel. Over fibre or copper, channel
latencyistypicallyonemillisecondper100miles.
Channel latency can have insidious effects on active/active system performance. These effects
are different for asynchronous and synchronous data replication, used to keep the database
copiesintheapplicationnetworksynchronized.
AsynchronousReplication
If an asynchronous-data replication engine is used to replicate data changes between nodes in
an active/active system, increased channel latency increases what is known as replication
latency.Replicationlatencyisthetimefromwhenachangeisappliedtoasourcedatabasetothe
time that it is applied to the target database. Increased replication latency aggravates two
undesirabletraitsofasynchronousreplication:
 Data Collisions: If applications at two different nodes in the application network should
update the same data item in their local database copy at the same time(by“same time”
we mean within the replication-latency interval), each will be unaware that the other is
trying to change the same data item. Each will replicate its change to the other node and
will overwrite the change originally made at that node. Now the database copies are
different,andbotharewrong.Thesedatacollisionsmustbedetectedandresolved.8
 Data Loss Following a Node Failure: Should a node in an active/active system fail, any
changes that are in the replication pipeline will not be delivered to the target system and
will be lost. Depending upon the type of communication being used, the replication
pipeline may include the communication channel. That is, a change sent by the source
system and not yet delivered to the target system (i.e., the change is still in the
communication pipeline) maynot be deliveredto the targetsystem.Therefore,thelonger
thechannel latency, thelonger thechange will be in thecommunication pipeline; andthe
biggeristhechancethatthechangewillbelostfollowingasource-nodefailure.
SynchronousReplication
Synchronousreplicationavoidstheasynchronousissuesofdatacollisionsanddatalossfollowing
a node failure. It does this by ensuring that all changes within a transaction are made to all
database copies, or that none are. Synchronous replication accomplishes this by acquiring locks
on all copies of a database item to be changed before making the change. Therefore, data
collisions cannot occur. Furthermore, since a change is guaranteed to be made to all database
copies or to none of them, there is no data loss should a source node fail except for transactions
inprogress.
However, channel latency causes a different problem if synchronous replication is being used.
Synchronous replication imposes an additional delay on the completion of a transaction while
confirmation is awaited from all nodes that the transaction can be committed. This additional
delayiscalledapplicationlatency.Channellatencyis animportantfactor inapplicationlatencyas
it determines how long the application must wait before it knows that it can commit the
transaction.
Application latency adds to the transaction response time. In addition, it causes other problems,
such as an increase in the number of simultaneous transactions in the system, locks being held
8P. J. Holenstein,W. H. Highleyman, B. D. Holenstein, Chapter4, Active/ActiveandRelatedTopologies, Breakingthe
AvailabilityBarrier:AchievingCenturyUptimeswithActive/ActiveSystems,AuthorHouse;2007.
5
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

longer, and additional transaction aborts due to timeouts. Therefore, any increase in channel
latencyaggravatesalloftheseproblems.
ControllingChannelLatency
One problem with determining channel latency is that it is not dependent upon the physical
distance between the source and target nodes. It is the communication distance between the
nodes. For instance, the source and target nodes might be ten miles apart. But if the
communication link must go through a central office in another city and then to local distribution
centers,thecommunicationdistancecouldbehundredsofmiles.
Furthermore, channel latency will change if the communication carrier has to route around a
network failure. Channel latency could increase dramatically, causing applications to fail as
transactionstimeout.
An extreme example of this occurred with the Mediterranean Sea cable breaks, mentioned
earlier.ThecommunicationchannelsconnectingEuropewithNorthAfricaandtheMideasthadto
be rerouted over a world-circulating path traveling over Asia, the Pacific Ocean, North America,
and the Atlantic Ocean. Hundreds of milliseconds or even seconds were added to each
transaction.
Therefore, it is very important to specify the maximum allowable channel latency in the
communicationSLA.
ErrorRate
Modern-day communication networks are very adept at correcting transmission errors. It is
generally assumed that a message ultimately will be delivered without error. However, the
operative word is “ultimately.” The correction of message errors can often be done via self-
correcting error codes embedded in the message. However, in some cases, the only recourse is
toretransmitthemessagetocorrectuncorrectableerrors.
Message retransmission slows down the delivery of the message. Therefore, to the application,
uncorrectable errors have the same impact as channel latency. They increase replication latency
in asynchronous-replication systems, and they increase application latency in synchronous-
replicationsystems.
Message delays due to communication errors may be more onerous than you think. A simple
analysiscanservetoillustratethispoint.Let
e=uncorrectablepacketerrorrate.
n=numberofpacketsinaTCP/IPmessage.
p=probabilitythatamessagewillberetransmitted.
Then
 Probabilitythatapacketwillbeinerror=e.
 Probabilitythatapacketwillbeerrorfree=(1–e).
 Probabilitythatamessagewillbeerrorfree=probabilitythatnpacketswillbeerrorfree
=(1–e)n.
 Probability that a message will have an error = probability that a message will be
retransmitted=1–(1–e)n=p.
 Probabilitythatamessagewillbesentonce=1.
 Probabilitythatamessagewillbesentasecondtime=p.
 Probabilitythatamessagewillbesentathirdtime=p2.
 Averagenumberoftimesthatamessagewillbesent=1+p+p2+p3+…=1/(1-p)
=1/{1–[1–(1–e)n]}=1/[(1–e)n].
6
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Asanexample,letusassumethatthepacketerrorrate,e,is1%(onepacketoutof100)andthat
amessagecomprises 30packets (n).Thenthe averagenumber of retransmissions per message
is
Averagenumberoftimesamessageissent=1/(1-.01)30=1.35.
A1%packet-errorratehasextendedthemessagetransmissiontimeby35%!
Communication SLA
As discussed above, it is clear that there are many communication channel characteristics that
can have a major impact on the availability and performance of active/active systems. They
include:
 Independenceofthecommunicationchannelsmakinguparedundantgroup.
 Bandwidth.
 Channellatency.
 Errorrates.
EachoftheseshouldbeclearlyspecifiedintheSLAwitheachcommunicationcarrier.
Summary
In an active/active system, the communication links are every bit as important to system
availabilityas aretheprocessingnodes.Therefore,theymustberedundant.Redundancyimplies
that the communication links are totally independent of each other and that they be used in such
awaytoensurethattherearenofailoverfaultsshouldachannelfail.
Inaddition,therearemanyother parametersthatareimportant.Theyincludebandwidth,channel
latency,anderrorrates.Eachoftheseparametersimpactsthetimethatittakestogetamessage
from a source node to a destination node. As this time increases, replication latency is extended
in asynchronously replicated systems; and application latency is extended in synchronously
replicated systems. Replication latency in asynchronous systems increases the chance for data
collisions and for data loss in the event of the failure of a node. Application latency in
synchronoussystemsextendsthetransactionresponsetimeandmaycauseapplicationstofail.
To avoid notworks, all of these parameters should be clearly specified in the Service Level
Agreementwiththecommunicationcarriers.
7
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

