Eavesdropping on the Internet
March2009
At the 2008 DEFCON hackers’ conference, security researchers Anton Kapela and Alex Pilosov
demonstrated a fairly simple technique to divert Internet traffic to an eavesdropping site on its
way to the intended recipient. Though this vulnerability had been earlier predicted, no one had
ever been able to demonstrate it. Kapela and Pilosov showed that they could eavesdrop on
DEFCONtrafficwiththeirownservertothecheersofthehackercrowd.
Eavesdropping can be used by corporations for competitive purposes and by governments for
surveillancepurposes.Messagescanevenbemodifiedintransitbytheeavesdropper.
There is no easy way to detect that your traffic is being monitored, nor is there any easy way for
the Internet to prevent this sort of attack. Your best bet is encryption so that your traffic has no
valuetoaneavesdropper.
The problem is in a vulnerability of BGP, the Border Gateway Protocol. BGP is the routing
protocol used to distribute global routing information throughout the Internet. It is used by all
majorISPsaswellasbymanysmallerprovidersandotherorganizations.
Inthisarticle,wereviewthoseelementsofBGPthatleadtothepossibilityofeavesdropping.But
first,wereviewsomepertinentcharacteristicsoftheInternet.
Internet Addressing in Review
If you mail a letter in Germany to an address in Boston, the German postal service doesn’t care
about the Boston address. All it cares about is that the letter is going to the U.S. and forwards it
there. The U.S. distribution center doesn’t care about the street address. All it cares about is the
zip code and forwards it to that post office. The post office sorts the mail and loads all mail for a
particular route onto the mail truck servicing that route, but it doesn’t care where the mailbox is
located. The mail-truck driver is the final link in the delivery process and puts the letter in the
appropriatemailbox.
The delivery of messages over the Internet uses the same hierarchical strategy. The Internet
hierarchy is three levels - networks that comprise subnetworks (subnets) that serve hosts. Each
host has a unique IP (Internet Protocol) address that in IP Version 4 (IPv4) is a 32-bit address
comprising four 8-bit octets (an octet is Internet-speak for bytes).1 IPv4 addresses are usually
expressedindotteddecimalnotation,suchas161.35.1.19.
1A32-bitaddressspaceprovidesforfourbillionusers.However,thisaddressspaceisnearingexhaustion.ThenewIPv6
extends the address space to a 128-bit address – 16 octets – that provides 1038 addresses. Though most vendors’
equipmentnowsupportsIPv6,lessthan1%oftheISPscurrentlydo.
1
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

In the IP address, the two higher-order octets specify a network. The two lower-order octets
specifyasubnetinthehigher-orderbitsandahostinthelower-orderbits.Often,thethirdoctetis
a subnet address; and the forth octet is the host address; but the number of bits used by each is
determined by the network administrator. A 32-bit subnet mask containing all higher-order one
bits specifies which bits are the network/subnet addresses (the first sixteen bits are always the
networkaddress)andwhichbitsarethehostaddress(thezerobits).Forinstance,asubnetmask
of 255.255.255.0 indicates that the subnet address is octet three; and the host address is octet
four.
The network and subnetwork addresses (i.e., those bits specified bythe subnet mask) are called
theIPaddressprefix.
Internet Routing in Review
At the simplest level, the Internet can be thought of as a series of networks interconnected by
routers.Amessageispassedfromnetworktonetworkbyroutersuntilitreachesitsdestination.
For instance, when you request a web page from your browser, you are asking for a page from
www.anypage.com. URLs are textual and easy to remember. However, the Internet needs an IP
address to forward your request to the appropriate web server. It is the Domain Name Service
(DNS) that provides this translation. Your browser accesses a DNS server to obtain an IP
addressforthewebserver.
This address is forwarded to a router to which your browser is connected. This may be a
corporate router or a router provided by your ISP. The router looks at the network address and
decides the best route, based on its internal routing tables, to send the request. This may send
therequesttoanotherrouterthatmayforwardtherequesttoyetanothernetwork.
Eventually, the message will arrive at the network serving the web server that you are trying to
reach.Thenetwork’s internalrouters willforward your requesttotheappropriatesubnetandthen
to the destination server. The response to the message, if any, is returned to you in a similar
fashion.
The power of the Internet is in its flexibility and resilience. Its network topology is always
changing. Hosts are added and removed. New routes are added, and existing routes fail and are
removed so that they can be routed around. To keep track of this dynamic network topology,
routers periodically exchange their routing tables with immediate neighbors, which update their
routingtables.Thesechanges are thenexchanged withtheir neighbors,andso on.Likearumor,
changesintheInternet’stopologyissoonreflectedinallroutersworldwide.
Autonomous Systems
Actually, the Internet is more highly structured than simplya set of interconnected networks. The
Internet comprises a network of interconnected autonomous systems (AS). An AS is a collection
of networks controlled by a single (or in some cases, more than one) entity, such as an ISP or a
largecorporation.Morespecifically,itisacollectionofIProutingprefixesunderthecontrolofone
ormorenetworkoperators.
Each AS is assigned a unique autonomous system number (ASN). Currently, the ASN is a 32-bit
number. However, this address space is about to be exhausted; and the ASN is being extended
to64bits.
2
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

BGP Routers
Autonomous systems (ASes) are interconnected by routers. Typically today, these routers use
theBorderGatewayProtocol(BGP)andarecalledBGProuters.
Routers thatsharea direct connection(a single hop) are BGP neighbors.A message propagates
through the Internet by being relayed from one BGP router to its neighbor until it arrives at the
destination network. There, the destination network takes over and routes the message to its
appropriate subnet and host. Within a network, routers may use internal BGP routers or, more
likely,routersusingRIP,theRoutingInformationProtocol.
It is the connectivity between the external BGP routers that describes the relationships of the
variousASesandthereforethetopologyoftheInternet.
To maintain a view of the current Internet topology, BGP routers exchange messages with their
neighbors advertising new routes and withdrawing unfeasible routes. These changes quickly
propagate through the Internet so that all routers have a reasonably current view of the Internet
topology.
The BGP Protocol
TheBGPprotocol2is thecoreroutingprotocolof theInternet.It provides themechanism for BGP
routerstomaintainroutingtablesthatdesignatenetworkreachabilityamongtheASes.
In the early days of the Internet, there was only one backbone network - the NSFNET, managed
by the National Science Foundation initially on behalf of a handful of universities. As the Internet
grew,itbecameclearthatmoreflexibilitywasneededintheInternet.BGPwasintroducedtofully
decentralizeroutingtocreatethisflexibility.ItsusetointerconnectISPandothernetworkscanbe
likened to Signaling System 7 (SS7), used for the interprovider core call-setup protocol for the
publicswitchedtelephonenetwork.
With respect to the eavesdropping problem, we focus our attention on the way in which BGP
routers advertise their routes to their neighbors. They do so by periodically sending UPDATE
messages to all of their neighbors. The messages can be sent whenever a router experiences a
routingtablechange,ortheymaybesentperiodically–suchaseverythirtyseconds.
The UPDATE message contains route information to a certain subset of one or more IP prefixes
(networks plus subnets). In the UPDATE message are two important fields that relate to
eavesdropping:
 Network Layer Reachability Information (NLRI): This field contains a set of IP prefixes to
whichtheUPDATEapplies.AnyoftheseIPaddressescanbereachedbyanyoneofthe
pathsspecifiedinthePathAttributesfield.
 Path Attributes: This field contains a list of AS paths that can be used to reach the IP
addresses listed in the NLRI. Each AS path is a list of ASNs that must be traversed to
reachanyoneoftheIPaddressesintheNLRI.
An AS path is built by the routers as a new path propagates through the Internet via router
advertisements. When a router receives a new route, it adds the ASN of its autonomous system
tothepathbeforeitadvertisesittoitsneighbors.Forinstance,ifarouterinAS22receivesanew
path that is [345, 2078], it will advertise a path of [22, 345, 2078] to its neighbors. This is called
AS path-prepending. A neighbor then knows that it can route a message to an IP prefix in the
2Y.Rekhter,T.Li,S.Hares,ABorderGatewayProtocol4(BGP-4),IETFRFC4271;January,2006.
3
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

NLRI by sending it to autonomous system 22, from where it will traverse AS 345 and AS 2078
beforereachingitsdestination.
In addition, the UPDATE message may include a list of withdrawn routes to the IP addresses
listedintheNLRI.
Thus, a router’s routing table may contain several paths advertised by different neighbors to a
particular IP prefix. When choosing a route, the BGP protocol chooses the path that routes a
prefix most directly to the destination address. For instance, assume that the message is to be
deliveredtotheIPaddress 161.45.210.10.ItfindsoneentrythatwillroutetoIPprefix161.45and
another that will route to 161.45.210. It will choose the latter route as being the more direct route
tothedestination.
If a router ends up with more than one route to a specific prefix, it will then choose the route that
goes through the least number of ASes. If there are still ties, it uses additional conditions to
choosearoute.
It is the updating of a router’s neighbors plus the construction of routes via AS path-prepending
thatleadstotheeavesdroppingvulnerability.
Hijacking
We can now explain the first part of the eavesdropping vulnerability – hijacking. Let us assume
that a nefarious AS installs a modified rogue BGP router. The AS is interested in all traffic to a
particular subnet with an IP prefix of 161.35.1. Its rogue router is configured to send an update
message to its neighbors advertising a route to IP prefix 161.35.1 in its NLRI field and a path to
which it has prepended its ASN. This route will be stored in the neighboring routers’ route tables.
Withinafewminutes,therogueroutewillpropagatethroughouttheInternetlikeabadrumor.
If the advertised prefix of the rogue router is closer to the desired subnet prefix than any other
advertised route along the path (saythat the closest other route is to prefix 161.35), BGP routers
throughouttheInternetwillselecttheroguerouteasthepreferredroute.Alltrafficcarriedbythem
to be sent to prefix 161.35.1 will be routed to the rogue router and thence to the nefarious AS.
There,itcanbeanalyzedbytheASadministrators.
In effect, BGP highjacking represents a denial-of-service attack. The intended destination will
cease getting some or all of its traffic. Even worse, this traffic is now available for viewing by
unauthorizedpersonnel.
This is a real threat. In fact, it happened to YouTube quite accidentally in February, 2008.
Pakistan decided to redirect YouTube traffic to a “black hole” via BGP hijacking because of what
it perceived to be a blasphemous video clip.3 However, a simple mistake by an engineer at
Pakistan Telecommunications Authority caused the redirection to be propagated throughout the
Internet.YouTubewasinaccessibleforabouttwohours.
Eavesdropping
Hijacking simply makes a site or subnet inaccessible. As with the YouTube outage, this can be
quicklydetectedandcorrected.Infact,theattackingAScanevenbeidentifiedbyitsroguepath.
What is needed for eavesdropping is the capability that, once hijacked, a message can then be
sent on its way to its intended destination. In this way, the recipient is unaware that his traffic is
being viewed.This cannot beaccomplished bysimplyhavingtheroguerouter sendthemessage
3PakistanliftsthebanonYouTube,BBCNews;February26,1998.
4
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

to its neighbors for delivery, as they will route the message back to the rogue router per their
routingtables.
Kapela and Pilosov solved this problem by adding a second redirection. By manipulating the AS
path-prepending for their advertised path (in an undisclosed way), they were able to compromise
only selected neighbors so that these neighbors would redirect their traffic. The other neighbors
wereunaffected.
As a result, once hijacked, traffic could be sent on its way to the rightful recipient via an
uncompromised router. Consequently, Kapela and Pilosov were able to mount what is known as
a Man-in-the-Middle (MitM) eavesdropping attack. This is what they demonstrated at DEFCON
whentheyinterceptedandviewedalltrafficdestinedtotheDEFCONnetwork.
Eavesdrop Protection
It has been known for a long time that a MitM attack was theoretically possible,4 but it had never
beforebeendemonstrated.
BGP hijacking and MitM attacks revolve around locating an ISP that is not filtering
advertisements. That is, such attacks could be prevented if only authorized peer routers could
advertise to each other. Although this is possible, it is rarely done because of the immense
manual effort required to establish and maintain the lists of authorized routers. Furthermore, the
memoryandCPUrequirementstodothisarebeyondthecapabilityofmanyoftoday’srouters.
BGP itself has nomechanism tovalidate the authorityof an AS toadvertise NLRI informationnor
toensuretheauthenticityofthepathattributesadvertisedbyanAS.
BGP is the only routing protocol that uses TCP to exchange messages between neighbors. A
move is underway to use a TCP option called TCP MD55 to correct this problem. Using such an
option, each TCP segment carries a signature incorporating information known only to the
connection end points. TCP MD5 is now required to be in all BGP routers. However, though the
capabilityisnowavailable,ISPshavebeenslowtoadoptit.
Thebottom line–MitMattacks arepossible,and you maynotevenknow when youareattacked.
Yourbest(andmaybeonly)protectionistoencryptallsensitivetraffic.
Summary
Internet protocols were developed in the 1970s under the assumption that the network is
trustworthy. It is now known that, unfortunately, this assumption is not valid. In July, 2008,
another serious vulnerability was discovered when it was demonstrated that traffic could be
hijacked byfraudulently modifying DNS servers to provide an erroneous IP address. This proved
tobeaflawintheDNSspecificationandwasquicklypatchedbytheDNSvendors.
The hijacking and MitM attacks described above do not exploit a bug or a flaw in BGP. They use
BGP in the way that it is supposed to work. BGP assumes that when a router says that it is the
fastestwaytoadestination,itistellingthetruth.
The best protection against such hijacking and MitM attacks is end-to-end encryption of all
sensitivetraffic.
4BGPSecurityVulnerabilitiesAnalysis,IETFRFC4272;January,2006.
5A.Heffernan,ProtectionofBGPSessionsviatheTCPMD5SignatureOption,IETFRFC2385;August,1998.
5
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com