Amazon’s Availability Zones
November2011
A major step forward in achieving high availability in the cloud is Amazon’s Availability Zones, introduced
in2008.AvailabilityZones allowa companyto runmultiple instances of its critical applications in different
datacenterssothattheapplicationscansurviveevenadata-centerfailure
There have been several spectacular cloud failures recently, ranging from hours to days, due to a wide
variety of causes – power, storage, networks, and people. These outages cut across all cloud service
providers, large and small – Amazon and Google have both contributed their share. A lesson to be
learnedfromtheseoutagesisthattherootcauseofthenextcloudfailureisprobablyunimaginable.
Consequently, for critical applications that just cannot go down, it is imperative to run instances of the
application in two or more geographically separated data centers so that the application survives any
destructive event. To this end, Amazon operates data centers in multiple regions throughout the world.
Within each region are multiple fault-isolated Availability Zones. Amazon’s Availability Zones are a major
movetowardsachievinghighavailabilityinthecloud.1
The Amazon cloud, through its Amazon Web Services (AWS) that were introduced in 2006, provides a
suite of IT infrastructure resources that can be used by businesses to the extent that they are needed.
The processing, storage, and network capacity provided by the AWS services can expand and contract
as the application needs change. A customer pays only for what his applications use. Amazon’s retail
serviceisnowrunningintheAmazoncloud.
TheprimaryAWSservicesfromanavailabilityviewpointinclude:
 ElasticComputeCloud(EC2)–providesresizablecompute,storage,andnetwork
capacity.
 ElasticIPAddresses–staticIPaddressesthatcanbemigratedbetweenEC2instances.
 SimpleStorageService(S3)–storesandretrievesdataviaasimplewebinterface
(URLs).
 ElasticBlockStore(EBS)–providespersistentstorageforanEC2instance.
 RelationalDatabaseService(RDS)–rescalableMySQLandOracledatabasesupport.
 ElasticLoadBalancing-distributestrafficacrossmultipleEC2instancesthatcanbein
differentAvailabilityZones.
 AvailabilityZones–fault-isolatedvirtualdatacenterswithinaregionaldatacenter.
In this article, we describe the AWS services that make up the Amazon cloud and how they interoperate
toprovidehighavailabilityofcloud-basedapplications.
1AvailabilityZonesarenotgeographicallydispersed,buttheyarefault-isolated.
1
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Regions
Amazon operates multiple data centers in several regions. It currently operates data centers in six
regions:
 USEast(northernVirginia)
 U.S.West(northernCalifornia)
 U.S.West(Oregon)
 Europe(Ireland)
 AsiaPacific(Singapore)
 AsiaPacific(Tokyo)
In addition, it runs a special region, GovCloud, for the U.S. government. Within each region are multiple
AvailabilityZones.
AregionhasanavailabilitySLAof99.95%,representingaboutfourhoursofdowntimeperyear.
Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2)
TheElasticComputeCloud(EC2)istheprimaryinfrastructurefortheAmazoncloud.Itprovidesresizable
compute facilities in the AWS cloud. Amazon operates its data centers under virtualization. It uses the
Xenhypervisortosupportmultiplevirtualmachines(VMs)onasingleserver.
The fundamental building block of the Elastic Compute Cloud is an EC2 instance. An EC2 instance is an
application running in the AWS cloud as a virtual machine (VM). A VM is physically implemented as an
Amazon Machine Image (AMI). The AMI is the boot image for an EC2 instance. The AMI includes the
applications,libraries,data,transientstorage,andotherconfigurationparametersfortheEC2instance.
An EC2 instance is created simply by the virtualization facility running the AMI boot file. At run time, the
CPU size, memory size, operating system (various versions of Linux, Windows, and Solaris), and other
parameters are specified for the EC2 instance. Once running, the applications provided by the EC2
instancecanbeaccessedovertheInternet.
Multiple EC2 instances can be run from the same AMI in the same or different Availability
Zonesorregions.
Elastic IP Addresses (EIP)
Early EC2 instances were limited by having just one IP address. Therefore, it was difficult to run multiple
instances of the same AMI unless the instances used dynamic IP addressing. The introduction of Elastic
IPaddresseschangedthat.
An EIP is assigned to an account, not to an EC2 instance. An EIP address is essentially a static IP
address that can be assigned to an EC2 instance. However, unlike a static address, it can easily be
migrated to another instance. When an EC2 instance is created, it is given an EIP address. All traffic
routed to that EIP address then goes to the instance to which the EIP address is assigned. If the EIP
address is reassigned to another EC2 instance, all further traffic will be routed to the new instance. It
takesaboutthreeminutestoreassignanEIPaddress.
EIP addressing brings a significant availability advantage to EC2 in that it provides a simple mechanism
toreroutetraffic toabackupEC2instanceshouldthe primaryinstancefail.Allthatneeds tobedoneis to
issueacommandtopointtheEIPaddresstothenewinstancethatshouldtakeoverprocessing.
2
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

EIP addressing also allows planned downtime to be eliminated. A new upgraded EC2 instance can be
createdwithitsowntestIPaddressandexerciseduntilithasgainedthedeveloper’sconfidence.TheEIP
address of the primaryEC2 instancecanthen beswitchedtotheupgraded EC2 instanceand processing
continues. If the upgraded EC2 instance subsequently exhibits problems, traffic can easily be switched
backtotheoldEC2instance.
Simple Storage System (S3)
IntroducedwithEC2,theSimpleStorageSystem(S3)providesstorageservicesthatcanbeusedtostore
any amount of data. Data is stored in buckets. A bucket contains multiple data objects, typically files. A
dataobject’ssizecanbeanywherefromonebyteto5GB.
Abucketcanbestoredinanyregion.ItisidentifiedbyauniqueURLspecifiedbytheuser.Objects within
thebucketarespecifiedbyuserdefinedkeys.
Allversionsofadataobjectaresaved,andtheusercanrecoveranyversionuponrequest.
AccesstoabucketisviatheInternetoverHTTP.Therefore,thecontentsofadataobjectinabucketmay
not be consistent as it is written, since data may be flowing over different Internet routes. The bucket will
beconsistentwhenitswritingiscomplete.Amazoncallsthis“eventualconsistency.”
When Availability Zones were introduced, the capability to synchronously copy S3 buckets across
multiple AZs was introduced. Up to six replicas can be maintained. The copy does not complete until the
bucket has been successfully copied to all specified AZs. S3 will detect corrupted copies and will repair
them.Withsufficientredundancy,Amazonclaimsabucketdurabilityofeleven9sandabucketavailability
offour9s.
Elastic Block Store (EBS)
The Elastic Block Store is another major availability improvement. Up until it was introduced, an EC2
instancehadonlyitsinstancestorageandS3storage.Theinstancestoragewas nonpersistent.Thoughit
wouldsurviveareboot,itdisappearedwhentheEC2instancewasterminated.
S3 storage was persistent, but it had high access latency since it was accessed over the Internet.
Therefore,itwasnotsuitableforapplicationsthatrequiredhighperformance.
EBSchangedallthat. EBS is persistentblock-levelstorage. An EBS volumecanbesized from 1GBto 1
TB. It can be mounted by any EC2 instance (just one at a time) and can be used just as any block
storagedevice.Typically,afilesystem isruninaninstancethatusesEBSforits underlyingstorage.EBS
also serves as a root device for holding the AMI for an EC2 instance. In this way, an AMI does not have
to be first loaded before bringing up an EC2 instance. In addition, an EC2 instance can be stopped and
startedwithitsstatemaintainedifEBSisitsbootdevice.
EBSis designedto behighlyavailable. AlogicalEBS volumeis synchronouslyreplicatedtomultipleEBS
physicalvolumesinthesameAZ.Oneofthephysicalvolumesistheprimaryvolumeandis theoneused
bythe EC2 instance that has it mounted. The other volumes are used onlyfor redundancyto ensure that
data is not lost due to a volume failure. If a volume should fail (primary or backup), EBS searches the
physical volumes to find one with enough space to use as a replacement redundant volume. It then
makes a copy of the logical volume onto the new physical volume. This is called remirroring. During
remirroring,thelogicalvolumeisnotaccessible.Applications attemptingtousethis volumearesaidtobe
“stuck.”
An EC2 instance can mount several logical EBS volumes. For instance, it could mount multiple volumes
andcreateaRAID0arraybystripingdataacrossthemtoimprovereadperformance.
3
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Backup EBS logical volumes can be created in other Availability Zones and kept synchronized with the
primary volume using synchronous replication. In this way, if the primary AZ should fail, a new EC2
instance can be rapidly created in another AZ and can mount the backup volume. As soon as the Elastic
IP address is redirected and remirroring is completed, the applications hosted by that EC2 instance are
backupandrunning.
EBS volumes can also be launched in multiple regions for additional protection. However, in this case,
replicationtothebackupcopiesinotherregionsistheresponsibilityoftheapplication.
Point-in-time snapshots can be taken of an EBS volume and stored in S3 storage. Snapshots are
incremental and can be taken as rapidly as every five minutes. If an EBS volume is lost, it can be
reconstructed from its last snapshot; and only the data that was created since the snapshot is lost.
Snapshots can also be used to restore data integrity following file corruption such as the accidental
deletionofafile.
When restoring a volume from an S3 image, the EC2 instance does not have to wait for the load to
complete.“Lazyloading” isused.Iftheapplicationrequestsablock thathas notbeenloaded,theblock is
immediatelyfetchedfromthesnapshot.
Depending upon file size, an EBS volume has an availability ranging from .995 to .999, with downtime
being predominantlythe remirroring time. Larger volumes have lower availabilities (the .995 availability is
fora20GBvolume).
Relational Database Service (RDS)
RDSsetsup,manages,andscalesarelationaldatabaseinthecloud.BothMySQLandOracleare
supported.RDSautomaticallyappliesdatabasepatchesandperformsperiodicbackupsofthedatabase.
RDSusesEBSasitsunderlyingblockstore.UserscantakesnapshotsofRDSdatabasesandstore
theminS3storageinamannersimilartoEBSsnapshots.
AnRDSdatabasecanbedeployedacrossmultipleAZseitherforbackuporforreadreplicas.Ifusedfor
backup,thebackupdatabasesarekeptsynchronizedwithsynchronousreplication.Inthiscase,the
backupdatabasescannotbeusedforreading.
RDSdatabasescanalsobedeployedinmultipleAZsasreadreplicas.Inthiscase,theyarekept
synchronizedviaasynchronousreplicationandwilllagtheprimarydatabase.
Elastic Load Balancing
AWS Elastic Load Balancing distributes traffic across multiple EC2 instances that can be in multiple
AvailabilityZones.ItdetectsunhealthyEC2instancesandceasestoroutetraffictothem.
Availability Zones (AZ)
Early on, applications running in a regional data center were subject to failure and data loss if the data
center suffered an outage. Amazon took a major step in curing this problem with its introduction of
AvailabilityZones(AZs).AregionnowcansupportmultipleAvailabilityZones.
