Beyond Redundancy
How Geographic Redundancy Can Improve Service Availability and Reliability of
Computer-Based Systems
May2012
The book Beyond Redundancy1 provides an in-depth analysis of various approaches to geographical
redundancy of IT systems to improve service availability. Among several recommendations, it concludes
thatthesuperiorapproachistheuseofactive/activesystemswithclient-initiatedfailuredetection.
The book is authored by Eric Bauer, Randee Adams, and Daniel Eustace, senior staff members of
Alcatel-Lucent,allofwhomspecializeinsystemreliability.
Enterprises commonly make significant investments duplicating critical systems in geographically
dispersed sites so their IT services can survive any disaster. There are many additional advantages that
canbederivedfromtwoor moreprocessingsitesbeyonddisasterrecovery.Inparticular,hardwarefaults,
software bugs, and human errors that may render a site inoperable for a period of time can be mitigated
by the processing capacity of an alternate site. Response times can be improved by locating sites close
to communities of users. Geopolitical issues such as language, currency, and regulatory differences of
variouscountriescanberesolvedbypositioningprocessingsitesineacharea.
Beyond Redundancy focuses on the theoretical and practical aspects of the benefits of georedundancy
onserviceavailabilityandreliability.Itisorganizedintothreesections:
Part 1: Basics provides background and definition of terms for georedundant systems and service
availability.
Part 2: Modeling and Analysis of Redundancy uses Markov chain modeling to analyze a variety of
redundantarchitecturesintendedtoincreaseserviceavailability.
Part 3: Recommendations uses the results of Part 2 to offer recommendations on architecture,
requirements,design,andtestingofgeoredundantconfigurations.
Part 1: Basics
Service-CriticalityLevels
The authors define four levels of service criticality that they later use to select from a variety of
georedundantarchitectures:
1BeyondRedundancy:HowGeographicRedundancyCanImproveServiceAvailabilityandReliabilityofComputer-BasedSystems,
EricBauer,RandeeAdams,andDanielEustace,JohnWileyandSons;2012.
1
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Criticality Impact Availability
SafetyCritical Unacceptablesafetyhazard seven9s
EfficiencyCritical Localorsystem-wideeconomicimpact five9s
Essential Losscanbeaccommodatedbyreducingcapacity three9s
Routine Minorimpact two9s
Georedundancy
Failure events can be caused by hardware failures, software bugs, network overloads and outages,
environmental faults (power, air conditioning), people, and policies. Catastrophic events that impact
critical infrastructure and that cannot be rapidly recovered locally are typically mitigated by having a
redundant system thatis physicallyseparate from the primaryfacilityat afar enough distancesothat it is
unlikely that both sites will be adversely affected by a common event. The sites are each configured to
provide sufficient capacity to handle the full processing load for normal operations. They may be
organizedas
 A primary site with a cold standby site that is provisioned with the proper equipment but is
otherwisenotinoperation.
 Aprimarysitewithawarmstandbysiteinwhichallequipmentispoweredupandapplicationsare
loadedandreadytooperateoncethedatabasehasbeenloaded.
 A primary site with a hot standby site in which all equipment is powered up, applications are
loaded,andacurrentcopyofthedatabaseismaintained.
 Anactive/activepairofsitesinwhicheachsiteisactiveandissharingtheworkload.
These configurations provide, in order, decreasing (better) recovery time to meet a specified Recovery
Time Objective (RTO). RTOs can range from days for a cold standby system to hours for a warm or hot
standbysystemtominutesorsecondsforanactive/activesystem.
The amount of data that may be lost – the Recovery Point Objective, or RPO – is a function of the time
between backups. Cold and warm standby sites that depend upon periodic backups can experience
hours or days of data loss. If data replication is used to keep the databases of a hot standby site
synchronized with the primary site, data loss can be reduced to hours or even minutes. Data loss in
active/activesystemscanbezeroormeasuredinsecondsorminutes.
The rapidity of recovery to a remote site depends strongly upon facilities that are incorporated into the
systemsforfaultdetection,faultisolation,rapidreportingoffaultconditions,andautomatedrecovery.The
effectiveness of site recovery also has a distinct human aspect. It is affected by training, documentation,
complexity(manualproceduresversusautomatedprocedures),andstaffcoordination.
ServiceQuality
In their book, the authors consider two measures of service quality – service availability and service
reliability. Service availability is the readiness of the system to provide service to a user. It is the
probabilitythat the system is up and running and is usuallyexpressed in nines. If the system is up 99.9%
of thetime,it has anavailabilityof three9s.Thedefinition of service availabilityis complicatedbyseveral
considerations:
 Whatistheminimumlack-of-servicetimethatwillbeconsideredanoutage?
 Howareoutagesforonlyaproportionofuserstobecounted?
 Howareoutagesofonlycertainfunctionstobecounted?
 Followingafailover,isfallbacktimetoagoodprimarysystemtobecounted?
2
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

 Isplanneddowntimetobeincluded?
All of these and other factors must be specified in a Service Level Agreement (SLA) between the IT
organizationandtheusersoftheservices.
Service reliability is the probability that service requests are fulfilled correctly with acceptable response
time.Reliabilityhastwoparts:
 Accessibility–theprobabilitythatasessionwillbesuccessfullyinitiatedwithaservice.
 Retainability – the probability that the service is delivered with acceptable quality during the
session.
Reliability may be measured via logs, service probes sending test traffic, or by tracking the ratio of error
responses to normal responses. Reliability is usually reported as failed operations per million attempted
operations.Reliabilityisoftennotcalculatedwhilethesystemisdown.
Part 2: Modeling and Analysis of Redundancy
The authors consider two types of redundancy – internal redundancy and external redundancy. Internal
redundancyis usedtorecover from faults withinasystem.Externalredundancyincorporates twoor more
systems in a pool that can offer higher availability or capacity to users. The systems may either be
collocatedorgeographicallydispersed.
MarkovModeling
The various redundancy architectures are analyzed via reliability block diagrams and Markov modeling.
Most of the analysis in the book is done via Markov models. A Markov chain is a directed graph
comprising nodes and links (edges) between the nodes.The nodes represent system states (such as UP
or DOWN). The links represent the rate at which the system transitions from one state to another. Since
the probability of entering a state must be equal to the probability of exiting the state, a series of linear
algebraic equations can be easily generated that can be solved for the probability that the system will be
ineachstate.
Though the generation of the linear equations is straightforward, their solution is tedious. A system with
eight states will have eight independent linear equations. To solve for the state probabilities, it is best to
use a software utility for solving the equations. In the book, the authors give several examples of system
availability solved via Markov models. However, general result equations are not given. If the availability
of a particular system architecture is desired using different parameters than those used by the authors,
itsMarkovmodelwillhavetobesolvedwiththoseparameters.2
SystemStates
Forinternalredundancy,theauthorsassumefivestatesforasystem(fivenodesintheMarkovmodel):
 Up – the system is up and is running in either simplex or full redundancymode. Simplex mode is
operation with a component failure but with its redundant backup component. The system has a
singlepointoffailure,butusersareunawareofthefault.
 Down Uncovered – the system is down, but no one knows it. The operators have no indication
that the system is down. The first indication might be frantic calls coming in to the help desk.
Whentheoutageisdiscovered,thesystementerstheDownCoveredstate.
2ForexamplesofgeneralsolutionstoavailabilityMarkovmodels,seeAppendix3:FailoverFaultModels, BreakingtheAvailability
Barrier: Survivable Systems for Enterprise Computing, by Dr. Bill Highleyman, Paul J. Holenstein, and Dr. Bruce Holenstein,
AuthorHouse;2004.
3
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

 DownCovered–thesystemisdownandisundergoingactiverecovery,eitherautomaticallyorby
the operations staff. Upon successful failover to the redundant backup component, the system is
recoveredandenterstheUpstate.
 Failed Automatic Failover – the system attempted to fail over to the redundant backup
component, but the failover failed. The failover must be accomplished manually before the
systemcanentertheUpstate.
 Duplex Failed – both components of a redundant pair have failed. One must be repaired before
thesystemcanreturntotheUpstate.
For georedundantsystems,theinternalredundancymodelabovedescribes theavailabilitystates of each
of the geographically dispersed systems. The authors overlay this model with three additional states to
accountforfailovertoaremotesystem:
 Up on Georedundant – the service has been recovered to the georedundant remote backup
system.
 AllFailed–boththeprimarysystemandthegeoredundantbackupsystemhavefailed.
 Service Migration – the switchback from the backup georedundant system to the primarysystem
isunderway,duringwhichtimeserviceisinterrupted.
Manyparametersareinvolvedinthesemodels,buttheprimaryonesinclude:
 thecomponentfailurerate.
 failurecoverage–theabilitytorapidlydetectandisolateafault.
 failoverlatency–thetimeittakestofailovertoaredundantcomponentandtorestoreservice.
 failoversuccess–theprobabilitythatthefailoverwillbesuccessful
Markov models are used to analyze simplex systems (those with no redundancy), active/standby (warm
orhot)configurations,andactive/activeconfigurations.
The high availabilitystrategy to be adopted mustmeetthe RTO and RPO specifications given in the SLA
andfall withinthecapitalexpenseandoperationalexpensebudgets of theuserorganization.(Inpractice,
the conflicting requirements of availability and cost will often need to be negotiated to arrive at an
acceptablesolution.)
FaultDetection
The authors point out that georedundancy is inherently more difficult than internal redundancy. Within a
