The Continuing Struggle with Legacy Systems
December2016
What is a legacy system? Is a legacy system defined by its age? Is it defined by the
fact that something (anything) new has arrived to replace it? Can a legacy system
continuetobeuseful,orarealllegacysystemsbad?
The legacysystems about which we are talking are decades old, dating back to the 1970s. Several were
written in languages no longer supported, such as COBOL. The software engineers that designed and
implemented these systems have retired or passed away. I know because I was one of those guys (now
retired, not passed away). Such legacy systems definitely are not maintainable. Yet many are still
operational,andtheycontinuetoprovideusefulservices.
Numerous legacy systems have been wrapped with modern interfaces to provide graphical user
interfaces and access to modern IP networks. However, their core services remain those that were
implemented long ago. They are difficult if not impossible to upgrade to provide additional services
requiredbytheenterprisesusingthem.
Banks Are Falling Further Behind on Their Legacy Systems
Legacy systems are one of the biggest barriers keeping banks from rapidly delivering the personalized
services such as those available from Apple, Google, and Amazon. Many banking systems date back
decades, and they are still in use. Banking legacy services are wrapped around the staff that work with
and maintain them. As these employees retire, they are replaced with younger talent who are unfamiliar
withsuchagingsystems.Thisattritionofstaffwithlegacyknowledgemakesitdifficulttomigratetonewer
environments
Banks’ legacy systems obstruct the movement of data between silos, preventing the 360-degree
customerviewthatisrequiredtoprovidepersonalizedservices.Bankshavebuiltlayeruponlayerontheir
legacy core systems to support new customer services such as mobile and social media. These layers
makethebanks’legacysystemsevermorecomplex,meaningthatbankscan’tmovequickly.Mostbanks
struggle to update their mobile apps on a biannual basis or to tie together customers’ smart phones,
tablets,andonlinebankingexperiences.
Competition is driving the digital world in a direction of anytime, anywhere access to services, data and
analytics. The ubiquitous and instant access to data and insights can be realized only by open, flexible
architectures thatsmooththecollectionof datafrom amultitudeof inputs andthatshareinsights instantly
withvariousdevicesandapplications.Bankinglegacysystemsareabarriertoachievingthesegoals.The
complex layers of applications wrapped around banks’ legacy systems slow the deployment of new
products andservices.The gapbetweentheservices thatbanks offer andthatcustomers expectfrom an
AppleoranAmazonwillcontinuetowiden.
1
©2016SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Tomake the most of the opportunityto modernize, banks will have to replace their legacysystems.They
willhaveto:
 rememberthatdataistheguidingprinciple.
 havetheirdataorganizedbeforemigratingtoanewsystem.
 separatestaffsotheycanfocusonthemigrationtothenewsystem.
 notdependontheirvendorsforinnovation.
Thismigration is beinghelped along bya developing industrycalled ‘FinTech’(for FinancialTechnology).
FinTech is composed of companies that use technology to implement financial services, to enable
provision of financial services through technology, or to drive technological innovation in the provision of
financial services. Some retail banks call themselves FinTechs. Others are developing customer-friendly
digitalservicesthemselves.StillothersareacquiringFinTechs.
It is estimated that 25% of 24 to 34-year-olds use FinTech services. This is expected to grow to 50% in
theforeseeablefuture.
Insurers Face the Same Legacy System Battles as Banks
The biggest barrier to insurance companies adopting digital technology is their heavy reliance on legacy
IT systems.Theyare not nearlyas far along as banksin upgradingtomoremoderntechnologies.Oneof
the problems is that insurance policies often last for decades. Old but active insurance policies are
managedbythelegacysystemsthatexistedwhenthepolicieswereissued.
Over two thirds of insurers run legacy COBOL applications written in the 1970s and 1980s. However,
insurance companies are set to be the next wave of financial firms to accelerate their digital
transformation.
Almost two thirds of the world’s largest insurance companies have invested in FinTech. FinTech uses
new technology and innovation to compete in the financial marketplace. One extraordinary example is
wearable technology that can monitor the user’s health for health insurance. Another example is the
embedding of devices in cars to monitor drivers’ driving habits so as to reward safe drivers with lower
insurance rates.With the advent of the Internet of Things (IoT), status reports from these devices can be
senttotheinsurerviatheInternet.
However, linking these systems to the insurers’ back offices is hindered by their legacy applications. The
extensiveuseofFinTechtechnologymustwaitfortheinsurerstoreplacethem.
Legacy Systems and Security
A major issue with legacy systems is that they cannot be modified. They were developed decades ago
whensecuritywasnotageneralproblem.Therefore,theydidnotencryptdatainplaceor inflight.Today,
thedatamanagedbylegacysystemsisbyandlargenotprotectedbyencryption.
In June, 2015, the U.S. Government Office of Personnel Management (OPM) suffered a breach that
affected twenty million individuals. Names, addresses, and telephone numbers were compromised,
thoughnosocialsecurityorpaymentcardinformationwasstolen.1
The OPM system was a legacy system that was too costly to move to a more secure environment. Such
legacysystemsarestillinuseinmanyagenciesacrosstheU.S.government.
1AMassiveHackontheU.S.Government,AvailabilityDigest;June2015.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/1006/OPM_attack.pdf
2
©2016SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Hindered by Legacy IT Systems, Texas CIO Forges a Way Ahead
Over half of the 4,000 applications used by the U.S. State of Texas are legacy systems. More precisely,
the Texas Department of Information Resources (DIR) found that 58% of its 4,130 business applications
are legacy systems and present an increased risk of cyber vulnerabilities. The systems also are
susceptibletounexpectedoperationalfailures.
The preponderance of legacy architectures inhibits the ability of the Texas IT staff from deploying
technology that could make systems easier to use. New technology can be wrapped around the legacy
systemstoprovidegraphicaluserinterfacesandtoincorporatemodernnetwork infrastructures.However,
thesesteps donotaddress therisksof theunderlying legacyplatforms.Theyare ahindranceto adopting
newtechnologiessuchasIPnetworks,datasecurity,andmovingtothecloud.
The Chief Information Officer of Texas plans to remedy the situation. Though the cost and disruption will
be significant, the State of Texas is in the process of replacing many of its more important legacy
systems.
South Australia Falls Behind on Upgrading Its Legacy Systems
SouthAustraliaisthesouth-centralstateofthecountryofAustralia.Itis anexampleofagovernmentthat
continuestorelyheavilyonlegacysystems.
Ten of South Australia’s most critical government agencies are running 226 servers still on Windows
2003, and five servers are running on Windows Server 2000. Microsoft no longer provides patches for
corrections for these operating systems. Thus, South Australia has been running unpatched operating
systemsandapplicationsnowforyears.
Thisdilemmaisclearlyatradeoffbetweenmoneyandsecurity.Toprovidesecurityforitslegacysystems,
South Australia takes several steps. It uses application whitelisting to control which applications are
permitted to be installed on a host to ensure that there are no unwanted applications or malicious code
executingonthesystem.Onlynecessaryportsandprotocolsareexposedtothenetwork.Itusesauditing
and logging to monitor system activities. This data is sent to a SIEM (Security Information and Event
Management) system that provides real-time analysis of security alerts generated by the auditing and
loggingprocesses.
It’s Not Only Software That Can Be Legacy – Hardware, Too
Itis hardtobelievesomeof theoldlegacyhardwarethatis still inuse.This observationis documentedin
the Tech Republic paper “The antique computers that just won’t quit” (see the reference below).
Examplesinclude:
 A25-year-oldCommodore65CstillinuseinanautoshopinGdansk,Poland.
 A 30-year-old Commodore Amiga 2000 still in use in a Grand Rapids public school to control its
heatingandairconditioning.
 PDP-11computersbuiltinthe1970swillbeusedinCanadiannuclearpowerplantsuntil2050.
 A forty-year-old IBM Series 1 run by the U.S. Department of Defense’s Strategic Automated
CommandandControlSystem,whichcoordinatesU.S.nuclearforces.
 Andofcourse,thereisme.
Summary
Itseemsthatbothsoftwareandhardwarelegacysystemsareheretostay.Evenwithalloftheirproblems
with respect to flexibility, maintainability, and usability, they often are simply too difficult or too expensive
toreplacewithmodernsystems.
3
©2016SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Somelegacysystemshavebeeninoperationforoverfiftyyears.Whatwillthenextfiftyyearsbring?
Acknowledgements
AMassiveHackontheU.S.Government,AvailabilityDigest;June2015.
LegacySystemsPreventBanksFromDeliveringonDigitalPromises,BankInnovation;June1,2015.
Theantiquecomputersthatjustwon’tquit,TechRepublic;October13,2016.
Insurersfacesamelegacysystembattlesasretailbanks,ComputerWeekly;November1,2016.
HinderedbylegacyITsystems,TexasCIOforgesawayahead,TechTarget;November14,2016.
SAgovt’slegacyITmanagementfail,ITNews;November22,2016.
BridgingthegapbetweensecurityandlegacyIT,FederalTimes;November28,2016.
4
©2016SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com