Sydney’s M5 Tunnel Closed Again by Computer Glitch
November2005
The M5 Motorwayis a major link connecting Sydney, Australia, in the state of New SouthWales,
with points southwest. Completed in 2002, the 22-kilometer motorway is partly free and partly
tolled.Itcurrentlycarriesover100,000motoristsperday.
A 4.5-kilometer tunnel near Sydney airport has proven to be the Achilles heel of the motorway.
Costing AU$800 million, it has been closed six times in the six years since the tunnel opened,
causingmajorbackupsandcreatingpoliticaloutrage.
The September Outage
ThelatestaffronttoSydneymotoristscameonthemorningofMonday,September22,2008.The
morning rush-hour traffic on the M5 came to a
sudden halt at 9 AM on that day. One of the
twenty or so computers that monitors the
safety systems in the tunnel suffered a circuit-
board failure. No problem, right? The system
has a backup just for this purpose.
Unfortunately,thebackupfailedtotakeover.
The tunnel was not reopened for almost three
hours. The closure of the tunnel shut down the
M5 in both directions from the Sydney airport
toKingGeorgesRoad.
Normally, the tunnel handles 6,000 cars per hour during the morning rush hour. The closure
stranded hundreds of cars for hours with no way to get off of the M5. 20,000 other motorists
turned side streets into gridlock as they tried to bypass the tunnel. Eight were injured in the
pileup.
To add insult to injury, a car fire shut down all east-bound lanes on the M5 the next day around
10AM,justafterthemorningrushhour.
A Miserable History
This was the second time in three months that the tunnel had closed. On June 25th, a computer
glitch shut down the tunnel for five hours, again during the morning rush hour. And again, the
backup system did not kick in. An estimated 27,000 motorists were stuck in the traffic backup.
Manyofthemgaveupandreturnedhome,givingupadayofwork.
A third closure occurred on February 1, 2002, just after the tunnel opened. Again, this closure
wascausedbyacomputerfailure.
1
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

Inall,therehavebeenatleastsixclosuressincethetunnelopenedinearly2002.Theotherthree
outages were caused by failures in other systems. The tunnel lights failed in January, 2002. In
March, 2004, the tunnel closed due to a power failure (where were the diesel backups?). In
December,2004,theclosed-circuitTVsystemsfailed.
Sydneymotoristsareundoubtedlybracingforthenextfailure.
The Aftermath
Theproblemsfacingtheoperatorsofthe
tunnel are manyfold. The tunnel
operation contractor is Baulderstone,
Hornibrook, Bilfinger, & Berger. Expiring
in 2011, its contract with New South
Wales calls for BHBB to manage traffic
averaging about 75,000 vehicles per
day. Rather, the tunnel is carrying over
100,000 vehicles per day. As a result,
the New South Wales government may
have to pay as much as AU$13 million
in additional operational fees over the
life of the contract due to the
overwhelmingincreaseintraffic.
Partofthetrafficincreaseisattributedto
the Cashback program, which was
introduced after the traffic modeling was
donefortheoperationscontract.CashbackreimbursesmotoristsforthecostoftheM5toll.
However, notwithstanding these factors, after the second major tunnel closing in three months
and the sixth in as many years, the NSW government is cracking down on the tunnel operators.
NSW Premier Nathan Rees, in typical Aussie terms, said that he was “filthy” over the latest
computerglitch.
After a tense meeting between NSW representatives and BHBB, in which threats were made to
cancel BHBB’s contract and turn operations over to the Roads and Traffic Authority, it was
agreed that the company would have a software engineer on site 24 hours per day, seven days
per week. The government also commissioned an independent audit of the motorway’s aging
systems and the associated safety problems. It is felt that upwards of AU$5 million dollars will
need to be invested to update these systems. The audit will look at tunnel systems around the
worldtomakesurethatthebestavailabletechnologywillbeused.
Lessons Learned
There is no reason why the safety-monitoring systems such as those used in the M5 tunnel
should be so susceptible to failure. Imagine the outcry if the Chunnel connecting England to the
European continent was as unreliable? As ithappens, the 58-kilometer Chunnel has beenclosed
three times since its opening in 1994, but all three closures were caused by truck fires on the
HGV(HeavyGoodsVehicle)shuttlethatcarrieslargetrucksthroughtheChunnel.
ItseemsthattherearethreeproblemsfacingtheoperatorsoftheM5tunnel:
 ItappearsthattheNSW government(andperhapstheoperatorsaswell)aretryingtoget
toomuchlifeoutof an old, creakysystem (though six years doesn’tseem tobe thatold).
2
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman

It is clear that the system is probably inadequate, but the strategy seems to be to try to
get just a little more life out of it. When will it fail next? How does the cost of the lost
productivity of tens of thousands of Sydneians compare to the cost of a new and
improvedsystem?
 Apparently, the backup system has consistently failed to take over the safety-monitoring
functions of the primary system following a primary system failure. This smacks of a
failuretoperiodicallytestthebackupsystem anditsfailovercapabilities.Certainly,during
the wee hours of the morning, tunnel traffic is light enough so that the risk of a failover
fault is mitigated. There is no reason why failover to the backup cannot be tested
frequently.
 On the other hand, we don’t know how often the backup system did perform properly. If
failover worked properly 90% of the time, 30 primary system failures in six years doesn’t
bodewellforthetunnel’ssafetysystems.
There are disasters over which we have no control. There are also the disasters that we just let
happen.1TheM5experienceseemstobeagoodexampleofthelatter.
Acknowledgements
Materialforthisarticlewastakenfromthefollowingsources:
SydneyMorningHerald IEEESpectrumOnline
TheDailyTelegraph LiveNews
YahooNews CampbelltownLocalPaper
ABCNews JamiiForums
1ThankstoRichardBuckleforthisobservation.
3
©2008SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
