So You Want to Mine Bitcoins?
April2014
Bitcoinsisadigitalcurrencythatmadeitsdebutin2009.Wedescribedinsomedetail
how bitcoins work in our earlier article entitled “Mt. Gox, Largest Bitcoin Exchange,
GoesBellyUp.”1
Bitcoin mining is the way in which new bitcoins are minted (digitally, that is). Mining involves packaging
bitcoin transactions into blocks and appending them to the bitcoin block chain that records every bitcoin
transaction. For each block that a miner adds to the block chain, he is rewarded with 25 bitcoins. At
today’s price of about $600 USD, this amounts to $15,000. Sounds like a fast way to make a lot of
money.
The backup service iDrive decided to try its hand at bitcoin mining. iDrive backs up its customers’ files
overnight,whichleavesmostofits3,000quad-coreserversidleduringtheday.Itput600ofitsserversto
work during the day mining bitcoins.2 After a bit of experience, it calculated that it would earn around 0.4
ofabitcoinperyear–about$240!
The Bitcoin Infrastructure
Howcanminingforbitcoins besodifficult?Theanswer isthatthealgorithmforcreatingalegitimateblock
of transactions is verydifficult to calculate, and its difficulty is raised as time goes on. To understand this,
wemustfirstunderstandabitaboutthestructureofthebitcoinnetwork.
TheBitcoinPeer-to-PeerNetwork
The bitcoin infrastructure comprises a large number of peer-to-peer nodes worldwide that cooperate to
manage bitcoins. Everybitcoin transaction is sent to each node in the network. Available to each node is
the bitcoin block chain, a sequence of blocks that contains every bitcoin transaction that ever occurred
sincebitcoinswereintroducedin2009.
Someof thesenodes are miningnodes run byminers.Their jobis to packagea setof transactions into a
block andappendthem totheblock chain.For this effort,theyreceiveas compensationsomebitcoins as
wellasanytransactionfeesofferedbythepartiestothetransaction.
A miner may be an individual, an organization, or a group of participants that form a mining pool and
sharetheprofitsbasedontheirrelativecontributionofprocessingpowertothepool.
1Mt.Gox,LargestBitcoinExchange,GoesBellyUp,AvailabilityDigest;March2014.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0903/bitcoins.pdf
2MiningExperiment:Running600ServersforaYearYields0.4Bitcoin,DataCenterKnowledge;February24,2014.
http://www.datacenterknowledge.com/archives/2014/02/24/mining-experiment-running-600-servers-year-yields-0-4-bitcoin/
1
©2014SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

TheBlockChain
The block chain is a linked series of transaction blocks that hold everybitcoin transaction made since the
currency’s introduction in 2009. Each block is protected by a hash value to prevent it from being
subsequently modified. Furthermore, the hash for each block includes the hash of the previous block.
Thisguaranteestheproperorderingofblocks.
Including the hash from the previous block has an additional advantage. The older a block becomes, the
more likely that it is secure, since a hacker would have to modify all subsequent blocks in order for the
blockchaintoremainviable.
ATransaction
A bitcoin transaction specifies that a certain number of bitcoins (or more likely, microbitcoins –μbitcoins,
currently worth about USD 0.06 cents) be transferred from one party to another. The transaction is
secured via a digital signature using public key encryption. The sender encrypts the transaction with its
private key and sends it to the public key of the receiver. The receiver decrypts the transaction via its
private keyto get the encrypted transaction sent by the sender, and then further decrypts the transaction
withthesender’spublickey.
The transaction is sent from the sender to the receiver via the bitcoin peer-to-peer network, which also
ensuresthatallnodesinthenetworkreceivethetransaction.
The amount sent to the receiver may be less than the receiver is specified to get. The difference is a
transactionfeethatisgiventothesuccessfulminer.
The transaction is only a proposed transaction until it has been included in a transaction block that has
beenaddedtotheblockchain.
ATransactionBlock
A transaction block is a group of transactions that are protected by a hash. The SHA-256 hash algorithm
is used, which creates a 256-bit hash value to be appended to the group of transactions. The group of
transactions yields only one value for the hash. It is virtually impossible (without immense computing
power)todeterminethetransactionsfromthehash.
A miner has access to every transaction generated, since all transactions are sent to all bitcoin nodes. In
addition, he knows which transactions have already made it to the block chain. He selects a group of
transactionsthathavenotyetbeenaddedtotheblockchain,typicallystartingwiththeearliesttransaction
that is available. A typical number of transactions in a block is about four hundred, though there is no
requirement for any number of transactions to be included. Typical transaction size ranges from 200 to
1,000bytes.3
A miner can skip transactions if he wants. For instance, he can skip transactions that do not pay a
transaction fee. These transactions will be picked up in later blocks by other miners. Therefore, there is
an incentive for the parties to a transaction to pay an incentive fee, since their transaction is not
recognizedbythebitcoinnetworkuntilithasbeenaddedtotheblockchain.
Akeytothetransactionblockistheheaderthatiscreatedforit.Theheaderincludes:
 Version-Thesoftwareversionnumberusedtocreatetheblock.
 Prev_block-Thehashvalueofthepreviousblocktowhichthisblockwillbeappended.
 Merkle_root-TherootofaMerkletreecontainingahashofallofthetransactions.
3BitcoinBlockExplorer
http://blockexplorer.com/
2
©2014SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

 Timestamp-Atimestamprecordingwhentheblockwascreated.
 Bits-Thedifficultytargetforthisblock.
 Nounce–Thenounceusedtocreatethisblock(describedlater).
It is only the header that is hashed by the block hash. Thus, the block may include any number of
transactions; and the time to calculate the hash does not depend upon the number of transactions in the
block.Therefore,aminer has no incentiveto limitthe number of transactions ina block,thoughthe block
sizeislimitedtoonemegabyte.
MerkleTree
The transactions are organized as a Merkle tree when they are added to the block. A Merkle tree
separates the transactions into “leaves” and creates a hash for each leaf. The leaf hashes are then
aggregatedandhashed.Thesehashes arethenaggregatedintoanother hashuntiltherootof theMerkle
treeisreached.Thisroothashisstoredintheheader.
Submitting a Block
Whenaminer has successfullyfounda hashfor his block,hesubmits ittothe network.Itis sentto every
node in the network, which must verifythat the hash is correct. If themajorityof the nodes in the network
agreethattheblockiscorrect,itisaddedtotheblockchain.Atthispoint,allminernodesstartworkingon
thenextsetoftransactions.
In the unlikely event that two miners arrive at correct solutions at the same time, the block chain will fork
with each of these blocks. However, the bitcoins network has procedures for correcting these forks and
leavingtheblockchainasonecontiguouschain.
Asmentionedearlier,atransactionisnotrecognizeduntilithasbeenincludedinablock appendedtothe
block chain. Until this time, it is a proposed transaction. In fact, many participants wait until other blocks
have been added to ensure that this block has not been hacked (a hacker would have to hack all
subsequent blocks before he could hack a block). It is typical to wait until the block is followed byat least
fiveotherblocksbeforethetransactionisrecognized.
Difficulty
So why is mining so difficult? It is because the network imposes a level of difficulty on the calculation of
theblockhash.Specifically,thenetworkrequiresthatacertainnumberofinitialbitsinthe256-bithashbe
zero.Themorezeros,themoredifficultitistofindahashvaluethatcomplieswiththedifficultylevel.
The rate at which blocks are generated depends upon two factors – the level of difficulty and the
combined computing power of all of the miners. As time goes on, the number of miners and the
computingpowertheyhaveavailabletothemcontinuestoincrease,increasingtherateofblockcreation.
The bitcoin network strives to keep the block generation constant. It does this by adjusting the level of
difficulty (the number of leading zeroes in the hash). Specifically, it attempts to set the block generation
rate to 2,016 blocks per two-week period. This is equivalent to one block every ten minutes. Every two
weeks, the bitcoin network determines the number of blocks that have been generated in the previous
two weeks. If more than 2,016 blocks have been generated, it increases the level of difficulty by
increasing the number of required leading zeros in the hash. If less than this number of blocks has been
generated,itdecreasesthedifficulty(thelevelofdifficultyisalmostalwaysincreased).
Ifaminercalculatesanillegitimatehash,hemusttryagain.Inordertodothis,theminermustchangethe
datathatisbeinghashed.Rememberthatitisonlytheblockheaderthatisbeinghashed.Thefirststepis
to change the nounce stored in the header. The nounce is a 32-bit number that can be changed for each
hash attempt (perhaps by incrementing it). However, the 32-bit nounce with about 4 x 109 combinations
3
©2014SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

has fallen a long way behind the number of tries that it takes to currently calculate a suitable hash.
Therefore, something else must change in the header once all nounce values have been tried and failed.
This is typically done by restructuring the Merkle tree so that the Merkle root in the header changes. The
nounce values are then run through again. This procedure continues until a valid hash is found or until
another miner has completed a block to add to the block chain. At this time, all miners begin the hashing
processover,usingtheremainingtransactionsthathaveyettobeaddedtotheblockchain.
Howcomplex is this calculationtoday?Itis estimatedthatthetotalhashcomputingcapacityinthebitcoin
network is 50,000 gigahashes/second (Ghash/s), or 5 x 1016 hashes per second.4 Since a new block is
foundevery10minutes (600seconds),thecalculation of ahashcurrentlyrequires about600x 5x 1016=
3 x 1019 attempted hash calculations. Of course, this is across the entire bitcoin network, and the same
hash attempt is made bymanyminer nodes before a solution is found. It is not possible to determine the
numberofminernodesinthebitcoinnetwork.
In terms of estimating the difficulty for a single mining node, the current difficulty as of this writing is that
thefirstsixteenhexadecimaldigits mustbe zero.5Thus,there are1616 =2 x 1019 hash values that do not
meet this criterion. On the average, half of these hashes must be calculated before a miner node finds a
solution.Thisis about1019hashcalculations.Evenwithaprocessingpower ofaterahash/sec.(Thash/s),
it would take 1019/1015 = 10,000 seconds to arrive at a legitimate hash value for a block of transactions.
This is 2.8 hours,muchlonger thanthe average ten minutes thatit willtakesomeminer inthenetwork to
randomlyfindasolution.
Computing Power
How can a miner gather enough computing power to effectively mine bitcoin transactions? In the early
days, normal CPUs (desktops and laptops) were used. They were able to achieve about two
megahash/sec(Mhash/s).percore.6
It was then discovered that Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) used in PCs were much more efficient
thanCPUs.GPUscouldachieveonehundredMhash/sofhashingspeed.
Soon, even this power became miniscule compared to the size of the task. ASICs were designed to
provide extraordinary hashing power. An ASIC (application-specific integrated circuit) is a special chip
designed specificallyfor bitcoin mining. The processing power that ASICs bring to the network has made
them extremely popular among miners and mining pools. Today’s ASICs can provide hash rates of
hundreds of thousands of Mhash/s, and some are being released that provide a few million Mhash/s
(Thash/s).
Many ASICs can be grouped together, and large groups used by mining pools can achieve hundreds of
Thash/sofhashingpower.
The more powerful ASIC devices cost several thousand dollars each, and each consumes several
kilowattsofpower.
Decreasing Rewards for Mining
Thebitcoinnetworkisdesignedtocreateasteadystreamofbitcoins,butthisstreamisultimatelytocome
to an end. In 2017, the 25-bitcoin block reward will be cut in half. Everyfour years after that, it will be cut
in half again. In 2040, the bitcoin reward will be terminated and there will be no more bitcoins created.
However,minerswillstillearntheirtransactionfees.
4BitcoinWisdom
https://bitcoinwisdom.com/bitcoin/difficulty
5BlockExplorer
http://blockexplorer.com/q/hextarget
6Mininghardwarecomparison,BitcoinWiki
https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Mining_Hardware_Comparison
4
©2014SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

There currently are about 12 million bitcoins in circulation with a value of about $7 billion USD. The
ultimatebitcoinlimitin2040isestimatedtobeabout21millionbitcoins.
The Future of Bitcoins
Thereareseveralinterestingobservationstobemadeaboutbitcoins.
ReductionintheNumberofMiners
As the bitcoin reward diminishes over the next few years and the difficulty level is raised, it is expected
thatminers willstarttodropoutofthenetwork.Thismeansthatthedifficultylevelwilleventuallygodown
unlesstheincreaseinper-minercomputecapacityincreases.
ValueofaBitcoin
There is a limit to the number of bitcoins that will be generated, currentlyestimated at 21 million bitcoins.
At $1,000 per bitcoin, this is a total value of USD 21 billion dollars. This amount is trivial compared to the
total currency value of most nations. If bitcoins really take off, there will be millions of participants
worldwide. Twenty-one billion dollars is not nearly enough to handle the level of transactions that this
group will generate. Therefore, many predict that the value of bitcoins will increase by a large factor. Of
course,ifbitcoinsdon’tmakeitintothemainstream,theymayultimatelybeworthnothing.
TransactionRate
Currently, the bitcoin transaction rate is limited to one block every ten minutes. At an average of 400
transactions per block, this is a rate of 40 transactions per minute. This pales in comparison to the
thousands of transactions per second that Visa and other payment processors handle. It is not clear how
bitcoins is going to modify its algorithms to handle a transaction rate that is orders of magnitude greater
thanthecurrentlimit.
Higher transactionrates canbehandled,for instance, byincreasingthe block generationrate.Tobeable
to handle ten thousand transactions per second, the block generation rate would have to be increased
fromoneblockeverytenminutesto25blockspersecond.
Summary
Bitcoins are generating much interest and a growing use in today’s society, especially among the
younger, more tech-savvy set. They are poised to either become a major currency for international
trades,ortheyaresettocollapse.Onlytimewilltell.
However,onethingisclear.Bitcoinminingisforthewealthywhoarepreparedtotakeonmajorrisk.
Acknowledgement
It you are interested in exploring bitcoins further, a useful reference is the Bitcoin Wiki at
https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki.
5
©2014SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com