– Our January Twitter Feed of Outages
January 2017
A challenge every issue for the Availability Digest is to determine which of the many
availability topics out there win coveted status as Digest articles. We always regret not
focusing our attention on the topics we bypass. With our new Twitter presence, we don’t
have to feel guilty. This article highlights some of the tweets that made headlines in
recent days.
The 10 Biggest Cloud Outages of 2016
Cloud Outages: Less Common, More Damaging. The frequency of outages and their durations are
decreasing as cloud providers gain operational experience and more mature technologies. That's the
good news. But the flip side is that enterprises and the population at large are increasingly
vulnerable from downtime. As modern applications and data sources become more and more
distributed, and our reliance on them to manage nearly every aspect of our lives grows, the potential
for harm, or at least intense frustration, is greater than ever.
https://t.co/YQgmL8zqBP
That is pretty, er, Nimble. Storage firm claims 'six nines' availability
Nimble says its storage arrays (all-flash and hybrid) have reached six “nines” availability. That
means less than 25 seconds downtime a year, with the measured availability - according to the
storage firm - being 99.999928 per cent. "Five nines” used to be considered a good standard of
availability. With Nimble offering its "six nines” as standard, other array suppliers will have to do their
best to match that.
https://t.co/AaCjdcC27u
Nine Steps Your Organization Can Take to Mitigate Downtime
An unplanned outage is one of the worst things that can happen to a data center – and to your
business According to a 2016 Ponemon Institute study, a data center outage costs businesses an
average of $8,851 per minute. The report also found that since 2010, the average total cost of a data
center outage is up 38 percent – to $740,357. Although it’s impossible to completely eliminate
outages, you can take steps to mitigate the consequences of downtime.
https://t.co/iVCDtupyoQ
1
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Banking on e-cash
While the idea of a cashless or less-cash society is appealing, given that it would help bring more
money into the banking system, the challenges of implementation are huge. While using less cash,
as 'e-cash' technologies proliferate, is a natural progression for any economy, what has skeptics
worried is whether the new narrative is being spun as an excuse for not being able to replenish the
cash pulled out of the system.
https://t.co/vfsiHUH8ow
Thousands still powerless in SA
Tens of thousands of South Australians were without power more than a day after a destructive
storm hit the state in late December and badly damaged its electricity grid. The storm brought with it
strong winds and heavy rainfall. It was the state’s third major blackout in four months.
https://t.co/SKCH1zJp8M
Paytm app suddenly taken down from Apple App Store
At a time when mobile payments have taken off explosively in India, the Paytm app has been
delisted for iPhone and iPad users. The Apple App Store no longer offers the mobile wallet after
Paytm found technical issues such as bugs. The company worked hard to produce an update to iron
out the problems and was awaiting Apple’s approval at the time of the writing of this article. The
temporary removal of the mobile payments application occurred on the heels of a service outage.
https://t.co/cKCBpt8A3B
New Microgrid Testing Facility in Colorado to Offer Flexible Plug-And-Play
A new private microgrid testing facility in Colorado will offer a pay, plug-and-play alternative to
government labs that it hopes will attract innovators worldwide. Managed by MRIGlobal, GridNXT is
slated to open in the first quarter of 2017 on 1,900 acres near Denver. With infrastructure
improvements totalling $1.5 million, the facility will offer innovators an opportunity to interconnect
and test new battery technologies, advanced inverters, component interoperability and grid
management systems.
https://t.co/hGeAQfQk8E
Digest Oldie but Goodie: "Why Are Active/Active Systems So Reliable?"
Active/active systems achieve their high availabilities because of their failover characteristics. Not
only do they fail over very quickly compared with active/backup and cluster configurations, but they
are relatively immune from failover faults. In fact, active/active systems do not really fail over. They
simply resubmit the failed work to a known operating node. Resubmission may be done externally by
the client or internally by the system. The bottom line is that active/active systems achieve their high
availabilities via the philosophy of Let it fail, but fix it fast.
https://t.co/g0AaGCssGh
2
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

Scrooge is clearly an ATO tech guy
The ATO (Australian Taxation Office) has moved to absolve itself of any deficiency in IT operations
management skills after ruining Christmas for the nation’s tax accountants with an unprecedented
three-day outage. Beginning 12 December, the ATO’s critical customer facing ATO systems were
down for three days in what Commissioner of Taxation Chris Jordan admitted in a statement was the
‘worst unplanned system outage in recent memory.’
https://t.co/ejxVgezHrF
5 backup mistakes you might be making
High availability does not a business strategy make. The continued survival of a business is not just
about protecting against downtime but ensuring data redundancy should disaster strike. And yet,
despite how fundamentally important maintaining and protecting data is, businesses continue to
make these five common mistakes. The first one is not backing up often enough.
https://t.co/McFZZUqlmt
Cyberattack suspected in Ukraine power outage
Security experts are investigating whether a power outage that affected parts of the Ukrainian
capital, Kiev, and the surrounding region in late December was the result of a cyberattack. If
confirmed, it would be the second blackout caused by hackers in Ukraine
https://t.co/ALYsVPxQ0U
Three Quarters of IT Applications Cannot Tolerate a Typical Unplanned Downtime Incident
Stratus Technologies, the leading provider of continuous availability solutions, recently revealed the
results of its Highly-Available and Fault-Tolerant Infrastructure Considerations Survey. The research
revealed that the vast majority of production servers and services are not intended to tolerate the
length of an average unplanned downtime incident, which was reported at 87 minutes. For
organisations with critical business applications, each minute of unplanned downtime can have
severe repercussions on the company, from lost revenue to not meeting service level agreements
(SLAs) to brand reputation damage. This becomes even more concerning when 53 percent of
applications cannot handle more than 15 minutes of downtime, and yet 80 percent of downtime
incidents are reported to last more than 15 minutes.
https://t.co/gqWuwQPd5T
Digest Oldie but Goodie: "Calculating Availability – Failover Faults." Failovers can fail, too
Failover times measured in minutes or more can have a profound effect on the availability of a
system that was otherwise designed to be highly available. Only if failover times can be kept to a few
seconds are extremely available systems such as active/active configurations relatively immune to
failover time. However, the effect of failover time on availability is only half the story. The problem is
that failover doesn’t always work. When it doesn’t, the system often goes down and has to be
recovered. Instead of a few seconds or minutes of failover time, there now may be hours of system
recovery time. In this article, we look at the effect of these failover faults on system availability.
https://t.co/QXAuSHpE1C
3
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

NAB sent 60k customer details to the wrong email
The National Australia Bank accidentally sent personal information of around 60,000 customers to
the wrong email account, the bank revealed in late December. The details - including names,
addresses, and banking information like BSB and account numbers - belonged to a group of people
migrating to Australia who had set up new accounts with the bank. When emailing the migrant
banking customers to confirm their new account, the bank also sent another email to an "incorrect"
address. It did not specify the incorrect address. The bank blamed "human error" for the bungle.
https://t.co/i70dvZyqr6
How technology is helping save the NHS
The NHS, one of the world’s largest employers, defines itself by the humanity of its dedicated and
tireless staff. But the reality is that the future of the health service will probably be decided by
smartphones and digital technology.
https://t.co/opguMbzoi6
UK’s National Health Service database crashes after staff member accidentally sends email to
1.2 million people
Accidentally hitting “reply-all” to an email might lead to awkward responses or some laughs in
the workplace – but it’s unlikely it will cause your entire system to shut down, which is exactly
what happened to the UK’s National Health Service emails in December. An IT contractor at the
NHS sent a blank test email to the entire staff database, consisting of 1.2 million recipients. The
email prompted a flurry of response emails, most questioning why they were placed on the list
and what the purpose of the email was. Due to the sheer number of responses in a short time
frame, the email system crashed. One NHS IT worker said in a tweet that he estimated there to
be almost 300 million “unwanted emails” in the system.
https://t.co/CyKjQseTgp
The 6 biggest enterprise tech stories of 2016
A lot happened in enterprise technology in 2016. Disruption has become the norm, and
companies now realize they must innovate to survive. As a year's end wrap up, CIODive
gathered some of their most-read stories of 2016, highlighting what the stories may reflect for
the future.
https://t.co/6rDv0h0N5m
Demonetisation: Going cashless without preparation is a dangerous opportunity for digital fraud
The recent demonetisation of Indian currency notes is a welcome move for dealing with black
money. However, the replacement of the demonetised notes has become long-drawn, given the
chaos at ATMs and banks. The elusive Rs.500/- note has only added to the woes of the common
man. The result of this move, whether intended or unintended, is a shift to cashless transactions.
The suddenness of the demonetization move has led to a spurt of digital payments, including among
people with little or no knowledge of the risks involved. The rush towards digital payments is
unfortunately a huge opportunity, which cybercriminals will certainly cash in on.
http://bit.ly/2iEbE2x
4
© 2017 Sombers Associates, Inc., and W. H. Highleyman

