Royal Bank of Scotland Offline for Two Weeks
July2012
On Tuesday, June 19, 2012, operations at the Royal Bank of Scotland, NatWest, and Ulster Bank came
to a halt. Millions of bank customers were affected. They could not receive their salaries or pension
payments.Theycouldnotpaytheirbillsorusethebanks’onlineservices.
Theoutagespilledovertocustomersofotherbankswhenexpectedpaymentscouldnotbemade.
The problem was a software upgrade that had gone terribly wrong. It was two weeks before operations
returnedtonormal.
The Royal Bank of Scotland Group
The Royal Bank of Scotland Group (the “bank”) is a holding company whose assets include the Royal
Bank of Scotland, the National Westminster Bank (NatWest), and Ulster Bank in Ireland. It holds other
assets throughout Europe, Asia, and North America (it owns Citizen’s Financial Group, the eighth largest
bankintheU.S.).
The RBS Group is headquartered in Edinburgh, Scotland. Its U.K. banks service over 17 million
customersthrough2,500branches.
An Upgrade Gone Wrong
Everynight,theRBSGroupprocesses over twentymilliontransactions in amassivebatchrun.A primary
function of the batch run is to transfer monies between accounts based on transactions that occurred
duringthelast24hours.
In order to properly manage the thousands of batch jobs, the bank uses the CA 7 Workload Automation
productfrom CATechnologies (formerlyComputer Associates).Batchmanagementsoftwaresuch as CA
7 is used to process routine jobs on a computer without the need for manual input. Jobs are prioritized,
scheduledandperformedautomatically,savingstafftimeandusingcomputerresourcesmoreefficiently.
OvertheweekendofJune 16thand17th,duringaperiodoflittletransactionactivity,thebank undertook to
upgrade its batch management CA 7 facility from CA 7 v11.1 to CA 7 11.3. However, on Monday, June
18th, a problem was noticed with the new version; and the upgrade was backed out on Tuesday, June
19th.ThatiswhenthingscametoacrashinghaltforRBS,NatWest,andUlsterBank.
During the batch run on Tuesday with the restored original version of CA 7, one of the batches failed.
Further batch jobs in the sequence could not be initiated until the failed batch job was corrected.
Unfortunately, the operations staff could not determine at what point in the batch stream the failure had
1
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

occurred. It had to determine the point at which transactions had been properly processed before it could
continuetheprocessingofothertransactions.
Even with the help of CA Technologies, it took until Friday, June 22, to pinpoint the cause of the failure
and to resume batch processing at the point where it had prematurely terminated. Though the bank has
not released details of the cause of the outage, industry information points to the deletion of a critical
schedulingfileneededbyCA7thatoccurredduringthebackoutofthefailedupgrade.
While the operations staff was attempting to correct the problem, a huge backlog of unprocessed
transactions had accumulated. Each transaction represented some customer who did not get expected
money or whose bill went unpaid. Online banking services were negatively impacted. Seventeen million
customerswereaffected,andIrishcustomerswerethelasttobereturnedtoservice.
Funds that were to be transferred to accounts in other banks did not get processed, so the problems
propagatedtootherbanksoutsideoftheRBSGroup.
In mid-July, when operations had returned to normal, the bank issued an apology and provided some
information concerning the cause of the outage. In released statements and letters to the authorities, it
said:
“The initial reviews we have carried out indicate that the problem was created when maintenance on
systems, which are managed and operated by our team in Edinburgh, caused an error in our batch
scheduler.
“This error caused the automated batch processing to fail on the night of Tuesday 19 June. The
knock-on effects were substantial and required significant manual interventions from our team,
compounded because the team could not access the record of transactions that had been processed
uptothepointoffailure.
“The need to establish at what point processing had stopped delayed subsequent batches and
createdasubstantialbacklog.
“Inordertobeabletorecommenceautomatedbatchprocessingandtomovetowardsanormalstate,
thebatcheshadtobebroughtbackintosequence.
“Unfortunately for our customers in Ireland, Ulster Bank payments follow in sequence after those of
NatWest and RBS. This is because of the waythe technology was set up at the time the three banks
wereintegrated.
“ItinnowayreflectsthepriorityweattachtoourUlsterBankcustomers.”
The Financial Services Authority, the U.K. banking regulator, has asked for details of the outage. The
RBS Group is undertaking a detailed investigation byindependent experts to determine what went wrong
andwhatcanbedoneinthefuturetopreventsuchdisasters.
The Aftermath
As a result of the outage, businesses were unable to pay their staff. Pensioners could not get their
pensionpayments.Tenantscouldnotpayrenttotheir landlords.Shopperswereleftstrandedatcheckout
counters. Home closings were delayed. There was even a case of a defendant spending an extra
weekendinjailbecausehisbailbonddidnotclear.
To help resolve issues, the bank extended branch banking hours for 1,200 branches, even taking the
unprecedented move of keeping some of them open on Sundays. The bank doubled its call center staff.
InIrelandalone,thecallcenterhandled70,000callsinthefirstweekfollowingtheoutage.
2
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

The bank notified customers that they could withdraw up to £100 over their credit limit on bank-issued
creditcardswithnooverdraftpenalty.
Thebankmadeitclearthatitwillensurethatnocustomerisout-of-pocketforanyexpensesincurredasa
result of the outage. It will reimburse customers for late credit-card fees and for the costs of telephone
calls, and it will resolve any problems with the credit-rating agencies because of reports of late payments
causedbytheoutage.
Help came from other sources. The Social Security Agency directed pensioners to go to a local bank
branch where theycould receive funds up to a limit if they missed receiving their pension payments. The
Cumberland Building Society offered to pay emergency salary and pension payments to affected bank
customers.However, other U.K.banks werenotso cooperative, takingthe positionthatthis was not their
problem.
ByFriday,June29th,tendays aftertheoutage,thebanksaidthatservicehadbeenrestoredto99%ofits
customers. But the bank’s Irish customers, who were at the end of the batch processing cycle, saw no
such improvement. The bank was still working through uncompleted transactions for Ulster Bank. Up to
100,000 customers across Ireland were still experiencing difficulty in accessing their money. Many would
notreceivetheir wages or pensionbenefitsuntilthefollowingweek.ByMonday,July2nd,itappearedthat
thebankhadfinallyworkedthroughitstransactionbacklog.
The costs of this outage to the bank have been variously estimated to be between £50 million and £100
million.Theyincludethecostsofkeeping1,200bank branchesopenforseveraldays,ofdoublingthecall
center staff, of reimbursing customers for a range of fees and penalties, and of working with the credit-
ratingagenciestoresolveerroneouscreditdegradations.
Whodunit?
There was a lot of confusion concerning where to place the blame for the problems associated with the
failure of the known-working version of CA 7 following the upgrade backout. Fingers initially pointed to
India.
The RBS Group had recently outsourced much of its software support and management to its Indian
subsidiary, TechnologyServices India. It was rumoredthat ajunior IT staffmember in India hadmadean
error duringthebackoutof theupgrade, perhaps accidentlydeleting acriticalschedulefileneededbyCA
7.
However, during the outage, the bank issued a statement indicating that it was, in fact, Edinburgh-based
ITstaffthatwereresponsibleforthefailure.
Lessons Learned
Onecommoncauseof data-center outages is that upgrades are attempted with nofallback plan in place.
Ifanupgradefails,theapplicationisdown.
However, in this case, RBS did have a fallback plan. The problem was that it didn’t work. Was it a
problem with proper documentation? Proper training? Proper testing?We don’t know, but we’re sure that
thebanknowknows.
One major lesson learned from this experience is the importance of a flexible customer-service model.
Thefactthatthebank couldimmediatelyengineertheopeningof1,200branchofficesforextendedhours
and could rapidly double its call-center capacity certainly helped in serving customers during this time of
crisis.
3
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

There was one other casualty of the outage. NatWest was named by Keynote Competitive Research as
the most reliable banking website in 2010. It’s a shame that this honor is now relegated to the dustbin of
history.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank our subscribers, Robert Wickes and Keith Parris, for pointing us to this story.
Informationforthisarticlewastakenfromthefollowingsources:
SoftwareglitchtoblameforRBSandNatWestonlinebankingoutages,ComputerWeekly;June22,2012.
NatWestcomputerfailure:YourrightsQ&A,BBC;June25,2012.
RBScomputerproblemskeptmaninprison,BBC;June25,2012.
RBSbossblamessoftwareupgradeforaccountproblems,BBC;June25,2012.
CA‘helps’RBSresolvetechproblemthatledtomassiveoutage,ComputerworldUK;June25,2012.
RBScollapsedetailsrevealed:Arrowpointstodefectivepart,TheRegister;June25,2012.
RBScomputerproblems:MPsdemandanswers,BBC;June27,2012.
RBSsaysmostbankaccountsnowupdated,BBC;June28,2012.
HalftheteamattheheartoftheRBSdisasterWEREinIndia,TheRegister;June28,2012.
ITfailureaffectedthousands,saysRBSboss,BBC;June29,2012.
SammyWilsoncriticisesUlsterBankdelays,BBC;June29,2012.
RBSsaysUK–notIndian–ITstaffcausedoutage,ComputerworldUK;July12,2012.
CA‘helps’RBSresolvetechproblemthatledtomassiveoutage,ComputerworldUK;June25,2012.
LearnfromthemistakesatNatWestandRBS,ITPolicyComplianceGroup;undated.
4
©2012SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com