Happy Valentine’s Day – But No Flowers
March2015
It was a sad Valentine’s Day for many in the U.K. this year. The financial transaction
network of Global Payments, Inc., one of the country’s largest card-processing firms,
suffered an outage on the afternoon of Friday the 13th, leaving shops, restaurants, and
bars unable to accept chip-and-pin card payments. The outage lasted for 30 hours until Saturday
evening,Valentine’sDay.GlobalPaymentsblamedtheoutageonaterminalnetworkserviceprovider.
Diners were turned away from restaurants unless they could pay in cash. Husbands couldn’t buy their
wiveschocolatesforValentine’sDaynororderflowersforthemoverthephone.
This was one of the busiest weekends of the year. Manymerchants reported revenue loss in the order of
tens of thousands of pounds. A number of merchants have demanded compensation from Global
Payments,thoughthereisnoindicationthatGlobalPaymentswillhonortheserequests.
Some businesses honored card transactions bytaking customer card details manually for later entry. If a
merchant was luckyenough to still have card imprinters to manuallyswipe card information onto a paper
form, this was simply a return to earlier times. Many merchants spent all day Sunday entering these
transactionsintotheGlobalPaymentsnetworkonceitreturnedtoservice.
Throughout the outage, Global Payments posted advice via its Twitter feed. One suggestion was to tryto
connectthecardterminalstolandlines.Thissolutionoftendidnotwork.
Amajor complaintof merchants was that Global Payments’callcenters closed at5 PM. Manymerchants
atfirstthought that theproblem was localizedto their establishment.There was no wayfor amerchantto
getdirectinformationconcerningtheoutagefromGlobalPaymentsFridayevening.
Service was finally restored at about 6:30 PM on Saturday afternoon, too late for the Valentine’s Day
rush.Followingservicerestoration,GlobalPaymentsissuedastatementsaying:
“On Friday 13th February, we began experiencing difficulties with transaction processing for some of
our customers. This issue related to a terminal network service provider and was fully resolved
yesterday. Global Payments understands the inconvenience that this and any such outage causes,
andweofferoursincereapologiestoallourcustomerswhowereaffected.”
This incident shows the importance of disaster-recovery planning, even for small businesses. Every
business shouldknow what itis goingtodoif itcanno longer takecreditcards.Willittakechecks?Does
it have a manual card imprinter? Will it trust customers with an IOU? If it is a major store with multiple
checkoutlanes,asubsetofthecheckoutlanesshouldbeequippedtohandlethissituation.
1
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

One alternative might be to have a few POS (point-of-sale) terminals from a second card processor. The
additional cost of these terminals might be insignificant compared to being out of business for several
hours.
This outage shows the importance of the availability of financial-transaction systems. We have become
such a culture of the cashless society with our payment cards that if this capability is lost, much of our
commerce comes to a standstill. That is why the bulk of financial-transaction systems are built with fault-
tolerant systems such as HP’s NonStop servers and are often implemented with an active/active
architecturetoachievesix9sofavailabilityandbeyond.
Thoughnot adoptedinthe U.S. yet,chip-and-pincards areusedaroundtherest of theworld and provide
a significantly increased level of security than the old magnetic stripe cards. However, that additional
securityisworthlessifthecardscannotbeusedbecauseofanetworkoutage.
Acknowledgements
Theinformationforthisarticlewastakenfromthefollowingsources:
Businesses lose thousands of pounds after chip and pincardsystem network crashedfor 30 hours, Daily
Mail;February15,2015.
Customers told to pay in cash as chip and pin problems cause havoc for businesses on Valentine’s Day
weekend,BristolPost;February15,2015.
2
©2015SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com