Simplifying Failover Analysis – Part 1
October2010
A system is down if it is not providing service to its users. To improve service availability, it is
common to provide redundancy in the system. Should a component fail, one or more other
components (not necessarily identical) are available to take over the role of the failed component
andtocontinueservicetotheusers.
Aredundantsystem iscertainlydownifallredundantcomponentsrequiredtoprovideservicefail.
However, it is also down for all users that are in the process of being failed over following a
single-node failure. Until those users are once again connected to a properly operating system,
they must sit idle. Furthermore, failover is not always successful. If failover fails, users are down
untiloneofthesystemsisreturnedtoservice.Thisiscalledafailoverfault.
In this article, we look at the impact of failover on the availability of services to the user. The
analysis leads to a surprisinglysimple technique for computing the net availability of a redundant
system when failover is considered. It also shows by example how reasonably fast and reliable
failoverscanstillhaveadramaticimpactonsystemavailability.
Redundant Systems
Typical system configurations that are used to provide high- or continuous availability through
redundancy include active/passive systems and active/active systems. In an active/passive
system, a second system is standing by to take over processing should the production system
fail. If this should occur, the passive node is brought into service; and all users are switched to
thatsystem.1
In an active/active system,2 one or more processing nodes are all active and are cooperating in
the application. A transaction can be sent to any processing node in the application network and
can be processed properly. Should a processing node fail, the users connected to that node are
switchedtoasurvivingnode.
A major difference between active/passive systems and active/active systems is the process of
switchingusers from afailedsystem toanoperationalsystem,aprocessknownas failover.Inan
active/passive system, the backup system must have its database and applications loaded, the
user network must be reconfigured, and the system must then be thoroughly tested before it can
be put into service. This process could take minutes to hours (even days for large systems using
magnetictapebackup).
1Inthiscontext,aclusterisanactive/passivesystem.Theclusternodesshareacommonstoragesystem,whereasthe
nodesinaclassicactive/passivesystemhavetheirowndatabases.
2WhatisActive/Active?,AvailabilityDigest;October2006.
1
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

In an active/active system, all that needs to be done is to switch users or transactions from the
failednodetosurvivingnodes,aprocessthatoftencanbedoneinseconds.
Failover
Aredundantsystem iscertainlydownifallredundantcomponentsrequiredtoprovideservicefail.
However,itisalsodownforallusersthatareintheprocessofbeingfailedoverfollowingasingle
node failure. Until they are once again connected to a properly operating system, they must sit
idle. Furthermore, failover is not always successful. If failover fails, users are down until one of
thesystemsisreturnedtoservice.Thisiscalledafailoverfault.
Consideratwo-noderedundantsystem.Usersaredownif:
 bothnodesfail,or
 onenodefails,andtheusersareintheprocessifbeingfailedover,or
 onenodefails,andafailoverfaultoccurs.
An Example System
Before proceeding with the analysis of the impact on availability of failover, let us look at an
example of a fairly complex redundant system comprising both active/active and active/passive
systems. We will use this example to calculate the overall system availability with the simplified
techniquetobedeveloped.
In this example, there are two data centers. Though both are actively engaged in their own
processing activities, Data Center A is running a particularly critical application that is backed up
bylessexpensivesystemsinDataCenterB.
In Data Center A, the application is running in an active/active system comprising two fault-
tolerant nodes. Each of the fault-tolerant nodes has an availabilityof four 9s3 (each is up 99.99%
ofthetime).Beingactive/active,usersonafailednodecanbefailedovertothesurvivingnodein
three seconds. There are no failover faults since it is known that the surviving node is properly
operating–afterall,itiscurrentlyprocessingtransactions.
The active/active system is backed up by a more economical cluster in Data Center B. Industry-
standard servers are used with a nodal availability of three 9s (each node is up 99.9% of the
3 W. H. Highleyman, P. J. Holenstein, B. D. Holenstein, Chapter 1, The 9s Game, Breaking the Availability Barrier:
SurvivableSystemsforEnterpriseComputing,AuthorHouse;2004.
2
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

time).Failovertimeisfiveminutes,andtheprobablyofafailoverfaultis1%(thatis,99outof100
failoverswillbesuccessful).
Should the active/active system in Data Center A fail, it takes twenty minutes on the average to
failover toDataCenter B. Failover testing is limitedduetothecomplexityandrisk offailover,but
what testing has been done indicates that one out of 10 failovers will be unsuccessful (the
probabilityofafailoverfaultis10%).
Regardless of the node type – fault-tolerant or standard servers – the time to repair a node – the
nodalmtr-averagesfourhours.
What is the system availability from the user’s viewpoint? We will visit this question after the
followinganalysis.
Failover Analysis
Availability101
Wedefinethefollowingparameters:
a availabilityofanode
mtbf nodalmeantimebetweenfailure(theaveragetimebetweenfailuresforanode)
mtr nodalmeantimetorecover(theaveragetimetorestoreanodetoservice)
mtfo meantimetofailover(theaveragefailovertime)
d probabilityofafailoverfault
A availabilityofsystem(probabilitythatsystemisup)
F probabilitythatsystemisdown
Thebasicavailabilityequationis
Systemavailability=A=proportionoftimesystemisup=uptimetime/totaltime.
Using the above parameters, the nodal availabilityas a function of its mean timebetween failure,
mtbf,anditsmeantimetorepair,mtr,is(notethat,bydefinition,mtbfistotaltime):
mtbfmtr mtr
a 1 (1a)
mtbf mtbf
Thiscanberewrittenas
mtr
mtbf  (1b)
(1a)
anexpressionthatwewilluselater.
FailoverAnalysis
Let p(x) be the probability of event x. From our earlier discussion, the probably that a user will
experiencedowntimeis
F=p(downtime)=p(dual-nodefailure)+p(failingover)+p(failoverfault) (2)
Letuslookateachofthesecomponentsofdowntime.
3
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Dual-NodeFailure
Theprobabilitythatonenodewillfailis(1-a).Therefore,theprobabilitythattwonodeswillfailis
p(dual-nodefailure)=(1–a)2 (3)
FailingOver
Theamountoftimethatauserspendsfailingoveris
mtfo
p(failingover) (4a)
mtbf
Notethattheprobabilityoffailingoveris thesameforusersonanactive/activesystem asitisfor
users on an active/passive system.Inan active/active system,onlyhalf the users areaffectedby
anodefailure.However,sincetherearetwoactivenodes,anodefailure will occur twiceas often
asafailureofthesingleproductionnodeinanactive/passivesystemthattakesdownallusers.
UsingEquation(1b),Equation(4a)canberewrittenas
mtfo
p(failingover)(1a) (4b)
mtr
FailoverFault
A failover fault occurs if the primarynode fails and then the failover is unsuccessful. The primary
nodewillfailwithprobability(1-a).Theprobabilitythatthefailoverisunsuccessfulisd.Therefore,
p(failover fault)(1a)d (5)
Downtime
SubstitutingEquations(3),(4b),and(5)intoEquation(2)yields
mtfo
p(downtime)(1a)2 (1a) (1a)d (6)
mtr
SimplifyingFailoverAnalysis
The key to the simplified method to which we earlier alluded is that Equation (6) can be rewritten
as
 mtfo    mtfo 
p(downtime)(1a) (1a) d (1a) 1a d (7)

 mtr    mtr 
Let
mtfo
a'a d (8)
mtr
UsingEquation(8),Equation(7)canberewrittenas
p(downtime)(1a)(1a') (9)
4
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

and
systemavailability=A=1–p(downtime)=1–(1-a)(1-a’) (10)
Inother words,thesystem behaves as a two-nodesystem,afirst
node with an availability of a and a second node with an
availabilityofareducedbytheeffectsoffailover.
TheImpactofFailover
The impact of failover on system availability can be shown
throughasimpleexample. Consider aredundantsystem comprisingtwoservers, each withthree
9savailability(a)andameantimetorestore(mtr)offourhours.From Equation(10),ifitwerenot
for failover, this system would have an availability, A, of six 9s. In other words, the only failure
mode is if both nodes should fail. Since we have no control over nodal availability (that is up to
the manufacturer), we call this the inherent availability of the system. We can do no better than
this.
Now let us consider the impact of failover on this system. Assume that the failover time is one
minute, and the probability of a failover fault is 0.5%. From our above analysis, the effective
availability,a’,ofthesecondnodeis
mtfo 1
a'a d0.999 .0050.990
mtr 4x60
Thesystemavailabilityistherefore
A=1–(1-0.999)(1-0.99)=0.99999.
0.999 0.999
0.99999
0.999 0.99
mtfo=0 mtr=4hours
d=0 mtfo=1minute
F=10-3x10-3 10-6 d=0.005
A=six9s F=10-3x10-2 10-5
A=five9s
Thesystem availabilityhasbeenreducedfromsix9stofive9s.Afailovertimeofonlyoneminute
and a failover fault rate of one in 200 has increased the amount of downtime by an order of
magnitude!Failoversdocount.
Curiosities
Equation(8) atfirstglancemayseem strangeintworegards.First,itsaysthatifthefailovertime,
mtfo, is greater than the recovery time, mtr, the effective availability of the second node is
negative. How can this be? This is simply a statement of the intuitive fact that if failover time is
greater than recovery time, then recover the failed node - don’t fail over to the backup node. In
fact, don’t even bother with redundancy if this is the case (except, of course, for disaster
recovery).
5
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

The other curious result is that the availability reduction is the same whether mtfo is one minute
and mtr is four hours or if mtfo is ten minutes and mtr is forty hours. Remember, however, that
downtimeismtr/mtbf.Forafixedavailability,ifmtrincreases,mtbfalsoincreasesproportionately.
Therefore,theproportionofdowntimeduetofailover,mtfo/mtbf,staysthesame.
An Example
Let us now return to our example that we posed in the beginning of this article. We can replace
ourdatacenterseachwithanequivalentnodepairperEquation(8):
The availability of each data center can now be easily determined from Equation 10, resulting in
thefollowingconfiguration:
However,wenowhavetwoproblemsthatrequiresomemodificationstoourearlieranalysis:
 A failover from Data Center A to Data Center B occurs only if Data Center A “fails hard”
(i.e., both of its nodes fail or it suffers an internal failover fault). There will not be a
failover from Data Center A to Data Center B if Data Center A is down because it is in
theprocessoffailingoverinternally.
 Thetwonodeshavedifferentavailabilities.
WewilllookatthesolutiontothismorecomplexsysteminSimplifyingFailoverAnalysis–Part2.
Summary
Failover in redundant systems is a fact of life with which we have to deal. Even fast and
reasonably reliable failovers can have a dramatic effect on downtime and availability. In Part 1,
wehaveshownhowtoevaluatetheeffectsoffailoveronsimpleredundantsystems.InPart2,we
extendthistomorecomplexconfigurations.
6
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com