Big Switch: Rewiring the World, from Edison to Google
September2011
The historic evolution of the electric grid has striking similarities to the current evolution of the compute
grid. Nicholas Carr, in his book Big Switch: Rewiring the World, from Edison to Google,1 traces the
parallelevolutionof thesetwogreattechnologies that havetransformedandaretransformingtheworld in
whichwelive.
The Electrical Grid
Beforetheintroductionofelectricity,factorieswerepoweredbyseveralmeans.Waterwasinitiallyamajor
sourceofpower.Factories werebuiltnearriversorwaterfallsthatdrovegiganticwater wheels.Complex,
inefficient, and dangerous shafts, gears, and belts transmitted the power throughout the factory. Water
wheelsgavewaytosteamengines,buttheintrafactorydistributionofpowerremainedthesame.
Edison’sInventionofElectricPower
Carr, in his book, traces the maturing of the electrical industry from isolated and independent power-
generating stations to today’s massive electric utilities. In the late 1800s, Thomas Edison developed the
first electric generator, the dynamo, along with the light bulb. His plan was to light entire cities with
electricity.Todothis,hesetupcompaniesthatoperatedlarge(bythemeasuresoftheday)multi-kilowatt
generatingplantstodistributeelectricityforthispurpose.
His dynamos generateddirectcurrentatrelativelylow voltages (equivalenttotoday’s common120volts).
This meant that large amounts of current had to be distributed (10 kilowatts at 100 volts required the
transmission of 100 amperes). This required large copper cables and therefore limited the range that a
power plant could service to about a square mile. Consequently, small independent power plants sprung
upallaroundthecountrytoprovidelocalpower.
Thereadyavailabilityofelectricityledtomanyotherinventions,primarilytheelectricmotorandarangeof
household appliances – washing machines, irons, vacuum cleaners, refrigerators, stoves and ovens, and
the like. This led to an increased demand for electricity, but the distribution of electrical power was still
limitedtosmalldistancesbythedirectcurrentgenerators.
IntroductionofAlternatingCurrent
It was not until the Serbian engineer Nikola Tesla invented the alternating-current motor that the
transmission problem was solved. Electrical use was no longer constrained to direct current devices.
Alternating current could be converted to very high voltages with step-up transformers and consequently
transmitted with much lower currents and correspondingly smaller copper lines. It could then be
1BigSwitch:RewiringtheWorld,FromEdisontoGoogle,W.W.Norton&Company,Inc.;2009.
1
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

transformed back to the low voltages required for end-user use via step-down transformers. Electrical
power could now be transmitted over hundreds or even thousands of miles by high-voltage transmission
linesusingalternatingcurrent.
Seeing this as a significant threat to his business, Edison launched a grizzly public relations campaign
against alternating current. He made great arguments as to the danger of high voltages, and even got
Westinghouse to build an electric chair for the State of New York to carry out executions of death-row
prisoners.
TheElectricGrid
However, the advantages of alternating current prevailed. In 1896, power was transmitted from Niagara
Falls to Buffalo, New York, 22 miles away. This success started a worldwide revolution that doomed the
use of small local power plants. Major utilities could now be formed to generate electric power delivered
thousandsofmilesaway.
Furthermore, with standardization, these utilities now drive the common electric power grid that shares
theconsumerdemandloadamongutilitiesasneeded.
The Evolution of Computing
Punched-CardTabulators
The author entwines the story of the emergence of electrical power with the emergence of computing.
About the time that electricity became common place, the age of information processing began to take
shape. It started with the punch-card tabulator invented by Herman Hollerith in the early 1880s. His
inventionwasputtousebytheUnitedStatesCensusBureauwithgreatsuccessforthe1890census.
Majorindustries wereattractedtothesavingsintimeandcostprovidedbythisamazingmachine,andthe
information age was born. Through a series of acquisitions, Hollerith’s Tabulating Machine Company
grew into the International Business Machines Corporation – IBM. Other competitors rapidly sprang up
such as Burroughs, Remington Rand, and Bull. Punched-card processing had become entrenched in
businesspracticesbythe1950s.
Mainframes
In the first half of the 20th century, companies dismantled their power generator departments as cheap
commodity electricity became available. In the second half of the century, they established new
departments dedicated to the technology of automated data processing. Leading the way again was the
U.S. Census Bureau. It purchased the first true commercial electronic computer – the UNIVAC 1 – in
1951.
Competitive mainframe computers were rapidly introduced by IBM (the 701 series), RCA, NCR, and
Burroughs. This created an entirely new industry – software programming – with companies such as
ComputerSciencesCorporationbeingformed.Corporateusageofcomputingtechnologyevolvedrapidly,
risingfrom10%ofcapitalequipmentbudgetsin1970to43%intheyear2000.
Early computers were large and expensive, and so they were institutionalized in large, dedicated
computer centers. Except for highly trained IT staff, a company’s employees had no direct access to the
company’scomputers.
Because everycompanycould not afford to build its own data center, service centers came into being. A
company could now send its processing to a data processing service center via punched cards or
magnetictapeandhaveitscomputingneedsmet,payingonlyfortheprocessingcapacitythatitused.
2
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Minicomputers
Then came the transistor and the inexpensive, small minicomputer. Programming became simpler with
advanced programming languages using basic English words and syntax. The minicomputer business
flourished with companies such as Digital Equipment Corporation, Wang, and Apollo. Data processing
servicecenterswerenolongerneeded,andtheydiedout.
PCs
With the introduction of integrated circuits, minicomputers rapidly gave way to personal computers. Now
everyone could have direct access to their own computer, and client-server computing was born. A new
startup in the computing world, Microsoft, carried the PC into the mainstream of computing. Users sitting
at their desks could not only run their own applications, but could tap into the power of major servers –
theoffspringoftheminicomputerrevolution–intheircorporatedatacenters.
TheWorldwideWeb
However,expansionbeyondthedatacenterwashamperedbythelack ofcommunicationsstandardsand
bandwidth.Therewas agreatwar betweentheX.25advocatesandtheTCP/IPadvocates.X.25provided
end-to-end communications. TCP/IP created a highly reliable communication fabric. TCP/IP won and the
Internet, spawned by ARPA, the U.S, Advanced Research Project Agency, and the worldwide web,
invented by Tim Berners-Lee, were born. High-speed fiber went a long way towards solving the
bandwidthproblem.Anyonecouldnowgetinformationfromanywhereatanytime.
TheCloud
The stage is now set for utility computing. No longer do companies have to maintain their own data
centers. By establishing giant data centers, companies such as Amazon, Google, and Salesforce can
provide data services over the Internet, creating what has become to be known as cloud computing. The
new technology of virtualization allows a cloud provider to move data processing load and storage
capacityrequirementsamongitsthousandsofserversatwill.
Companies can run their applications on cloud systems or use applications provided by cloud providers,
payingonlyforthecomputingcapacitythattheyuse. Afullcirclehasbeenmadefrom theservicecenters
ofthe1960stothecloudservicesoftoday.
Furthermore, as minicomputers replaced much of the mainframe market and PCs then replaced
minicomputers,thecloudmayreplacePCs.Rather thanneedingaPC torunapplications,users cannow
usestripped-downbrowserstoaccessalloftheirneedsdirectlyfromthecloud.
TheWorldwideComputer
The author looks into the future of cloud computing to what he terms the World Wide Computer. There
maycome a time when a user has no idea from where his computing services are coming. Standardized
interfaces will allow his applications to be run on any cloud anywhere. The compute grid, akin to the
electricgrid,willhavebeenachieved.
The Electric Grid and the Compute Grid
Carr points out the fascinating parallelism between the electric grid and what may become the compute
grid.
In the early days of electricity, a company had to have its own generating plant. In the early days of
computing,acompanyhadtohaveitsowndatacenter.
3
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Theuseof thesetwotechnologies was initiallytooexpensiveandtechnicallydifficultformanycompanies
to manage. The appearance of local (direct current) power companies and the formation of data
processingservicecentersallowedsmallercompaniestotakeadvantageofthesetechnologies.
Thedevelopmentofmanyusefulelectricalappliances andof small,inexpensive computers increasedthe
demand these technologies, but they were still limited to relatively local use. The introduction of
alternating current allowed generating plants to transmit their power over thousands of miles. The
introduction of the Internet allowed users to access data services anywhere in the world, including those
ofthegrowingnumberofcloudproviders.
As electrical standards became adopted, power utilities could cooperate with each other, and the
electrical grid was developed. The author proposes that as computing standards become adopted, the
compute cloud providers will be able to interoperate, and the compute grid – the Worldwide Computer –
willevolve.
Social Implications
The introduction of wide-spread availability of electricity caused many changes in our society. Some
companies such as ice manufacturers were put out of business as their services were no longer needed.
Highlyskilled craftsmenfound their jobs being taken over byelectricallyoperated machines that could do
their better, faster and cheaper. The introduction of the mass-produced automobile made possible by
electrically-poweredassemblylinesstartedamigrationfromthecitiestosuburbia.
Likewise, the widespread introduction of computing power is having significant social and economic
impact,bothgoodandbad.Thewebis empoweringindividuals tobemoreproductiveandinformed.New
small businesses can be formed and can create an immediate worldwide presence with their own easily
generatedwebsite.
Buttheauthorpointsoutthattherearesomeseriousconsequencesofthewebthatareconcerting.
FromtheManytotheFew
The web lets individuals set up companies very easily, and some of them become very successful. But
thisattributecanbetakentotheextreme.
A group of three friends came up with an idea to start a video-sharing service in 2005. YouTube was
born. Just ten months after it was launched, Google acquired YouTube for a staggering $1.65 billion,
bringing the two twenty-something primary founders over a third of a billion dollars each. At the time,
YouTubehadjustsixtyemployees.
The web allows people to start big businesses with small payrolls. Skype was acquired by EBay two
years after its founding for $2.1 billion. Skype had 200 employees, 80,000 fewer than giant British
Telecom,eventhoughSkypehadtwiceasmanysubscribers.
Craigslist,oneofthemostpopularsitesontheweb,isstaffedbyonlytwenty-twopeople(asof2006).
PlentyOfFish is the largest dating service in Canada. By 2006, 500,000 people were logging in everyday
andviewing600millionpagesamonth.PlentyOfFishe’stotalpayroll?One,itsfounder.
The web has the potential of concentrating wealth in the hands of a few while offering little chance of
employmentforthemasses.
4
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Polarization
Throughout recent history, the opinions of people were shaped by the news they received from radio,
television, and print. Though this represented a broad spectrum of information and opinions, it was
necessarilylimited and provided no effective means for feedback. People within a societytended to have
arangeofviewsbasedonthisinformation,buttherewasreasonableoverlapbetweentheirviews.
The web has now changed all that. Anyone can go onto the web and find blogs, stories, and
commentaries on any subject. Furthermore, they can add their own input as comments to these media
andcanstarttheirownblogs.
Studies have shown that people tend to migrate to the web sources that support their own views. This
makes them even more rigid in their beliefs. The result is a polarization of society where once there was
reasonable overlap. The very abundance of information on the Internet may serve not to temper
extremism,butrathertoamplifyit.
Web optimists submit that digital technology can be a natural force drawing people together. In some
extreme cases such as popular uprisings against despotic regimes, this may be true. But in the general
case,suchoptimismiscalledintoquestion.
TheLossofAnonymity
Anicecharacteristic of the webis thatonecango on andbrowse whatever one wants andbecompletely
anonymous.Orsomostthink.
The reality is that every key stroke, every page visited, is being recorded by many companies for
marketingandotherpurposes.Googledoesthisopenlytotailoritssearchresults totheindividualmaking
aquery.
Is this important to us? Somestudies have suggested an emphatic “yes!” In 2006, AOL released a report
detailingthekeywordsenteredintoitssearchengineby657,000ofitssubscribers.Toprotectprivacy,the
name of each individual was replaced with a number. AOL believed that the information would be useful
to academic and corporate researchers studying the behavior of web surfers. But some wondered
whetherthedatawasasanonymousasitseemed.
Two New York Times reporters and their editor decided to find out. They looked at a set of keywords
attributed to one randomly selected subscriber. It took them just two hours to deduce the name, address,
and telephone number of the subscriber from information derived from their own web searches. The next
morning,asixty-two year old widow in Lilburn,Georgia,awoketo find her picture onthefront pageof the
Times.
Several other similar and successful efforts have proven beyond a shadow of a doubt that the web has
zeroprivacy.
Andthen,ofcourse,therearespammersandhackers.
iGod
Theauthorconcludeshisbook witharatheresotericlook intothefuture,basedonthemusingsofGoogle
founders Larry Page and Sergey Brin. They predict that someday in the not too distant future, the entire
knowledgeof the webwillbeanintegralpartof eachperson’s brainimplementedbysomesortof adirect
connection.
5
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Summary
The emergence of computing and especially the web have made dramatic and positive changes in our
life.However,astheauthorNicholasCarrconcludes:
“ It’s clear that two of the hopes most dear to the Internet optimists – that theWeb will create a more
bountiful culture and that it will promote greater harmony and understanding – should be treated with
skepticism.Culturalimpoverishmentandsocialfragmentationseemequallylikelyoutcomes.”
Acknowledgement
Wewouldliketothankoursubscriber,RonByer,forpointingustothisfascinatingbook.
6
©2011SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com