Business Continuity Today
March2009
Business Continuity Today is a freely-available living eBook covering a broad range of topics
relating to business continuity. We say“living” because the book is a perpetual work-in-progress.
PublishedbyVisionSolutions,anewchapterisaddedeveryfewmonths.Sixchaptershavebeen
publishedsinceFebruary,2007;andtheseventhisdueoutsoon.Thebookisdownloadablefrom
www.businesscontinuitytoday.com.
Each of the chapters is an overview of some pertinent field. Some of the chapters are written by
Vision Solutions staff, and others are written by guest experts in their fields. As overviews, they
areshortonspecificsbutlongonthebroadcoverageoftheirsubjects.ThoughVisionSolutionsis
an IBM Premier Business Partner focusing on business continuity solutions for IBM systems, the
bookiswonderfullynon-vendorspecific.
Todate,theBusinessContinuityTodayeBookhaspublishedthefollowingchapters:
Chapter1:PlanningforBusinessResilience
Chapter2:SecurityThreats,Trends,andRisks
Chapter3:OptimizingDataAvailabilityinInformationHungryOrganizations
Chapter4:ComplianceandtheNewRealityforITResiliency
Chapter5:MaintainingAvailabilitywithVirtualizationTechnologies
Chapter6:DataReplication:MakingSenseoftheOptions
ItsforthcomingChapter7isentitled“MeetingtheRecoveryImperative.”
Chapter 1: Planning for Business Resilience
PublishedinFebruary,2007,andauthoredbyBillHammond,director ofVision Solutions’product
strategy for the MIMIX family of information availability software solutions, “Planning for
Information Resilience” is an overview of the needs for business continuity. It is targeted to those
tryingtofamiliarizethemselveswiththefield.
The author notes that business resilience encompasses what is commonly known as business
continuity, continuous availability, high availability, and data protection and recovery. All of these
termsrelatetotheprotectionofthecontinuousavailabilityofanenterprise’sITservicesanddata.
System downtime can be caused by unplanned outages as well as planned downtime for
scheduledmaintenance. Surprisingly,studies haveshownthatplanned downtimecreates 70% to
90%ofallITinterruptions.
1
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Depending upon the application, acceptable downtime can range from multiple hours per year to
absolute continuous availability with no data loss. High-availability solutions can be extended if
desiredtodisaster-recoverysolutionsthatprotectagainstmajordata-centerdisasters.
The first step in determining an organization’s optimum availability strategy is to determine the
allowable amount of downtime (RTO – recovery time objective) and data loss (RPO – recovery
point objective) for each application. Next, service level agreements (SLAs) must be defined to
determinewhethertheseobjectivesarebeingmetbasedonmeaningfulmeasurements.
Ideally, an application will have an RTO and an RPO of zero (no downtime, no data loss).
However, as RTO and RPO approach zero, the cost of the availability solutions significantly
increase. Therefore, the availability requirements for each application must be mapped onto a
continuumofavailabilitysolutionsthatwillprovideanacceptablebalancebetweenavailabilityand
cost.
The author discusses several approaches to resilience along the availability/cost curve. Off-site
hotsites provideremotebackupof entiresystems butcantakehours todays torecover andmay
lose hours to days of data. The same is true for magnetic tape backup and recovery. Disk-based
backup and recovery can reduce these times significantly, but objectives are still measured in
hours. Continuous data protection (CDP) that captures data modifications as they occur can
reduceRPOandRTOtonearzero.
High-availability software solutions use a backup server with a current replica of the application
environment that can take over in the event of a primary system failure in minutes or seconds
with zero loss of data. These solutions are becoming affordable enough to be considered by
smalltomid-sizedbusinesses.
Chapter1endswithapairofbriefcasestudies.
Eliminating downtime via business resilience can reap many rewards, including increased
profitability, customer satisfaction, market share, and revenue. It can solve the availability issues
of working with offshore customers and ensure that the enterprise can meet new and existing
regulatoryrequirements.
Chapter 2: Security Threats, Trends, and Risks
Viruses, worms, denial-of-service attacks, and other malware can cause outages to Internet-
based applications just as system failures can. IBM’s Internet Security Systems (ISS) X-Force
has been monitoring the presence and growth of malware for over a decade. Chapter 2,
published in April, 2007, and authored by Gunter Ollmann, director of security strategy at ISS, is
anin-depthlookatwhatX-Forcehasfound.
During 2006, identified vulnerabilities in commercially available applications increased at an
annual rate of 40%, totaling over 7,000; and this rate is exponentially increasing. The largest
originators of spam were the U.S., Spain, and France, with 93% of spam being in English
(German is the next most popular language). U.S.-based businesses are most often targeted by
phishingemails.Traditionally,theweeksbeforeThanksgivingandChristmasarethebusiest.
Software vulnerabilities are usually divulged by the vendor. The top ten vendors disclosing
vulnerabilitiesaccountedfor14%ofthetotalvulnerabilities.14%ofthesevulnerabilitiesremained
unpatched,whereas65%oftheothervulnerabilitiesremainedunpatched.
The most highly prized vulnerabilities are those than can be exploited remotely, providing an
attacker with the greatest opportunity for host compromise. In 2000, 44% of all vulnerabilities
2
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

were remotely exploitable. This proportion grew to over 80% by 2006. The consequences of
exploitationinclude:
 gainingaccess  datamanipulation
 denialofservice  obtaininginformation
 bypassingsecurity  gainingprivileges
 informational  filemanipulation
Spam is particularly intrusive and increased by 100% in 2006. In an average day, X-Force
analyzed over 150,000 spam messages. Half of all spam messages pass through no email
serversbecausemostspammessagesaresentbybotnetsdirectlytotherecipient.
Image-based spam is exceptionally difficult to detect, and the outlook is that this is going to get
even worse as spammers improve further on their technology. For example, animated GIF
images and multicolor embedded text in images are being increasingly used to propagate spam.
Image-basedspamincreasedfromalittleoverzeroin2005toover40%by2006.
Modern malware is now the digital equivalent of the Swiss army knife. It includes, in order of
occurrence, downloaders, Trojans, worms, backdoors, dialers, password stealers, viruses, and
keyloggers.
InternetExplorerreported34vulnerabilitiesin2006,andFirefoxreported64.
Internet security breaches are costing businesses billions of dollars a year. Businesses need to
aggressively address Internet malware to preclude downtime, loss of customers, decreased
employeeproductivity,lostrevenue,andtheriskofimpendinglawsuits.
Chapter 3: Optimizing Data Availability in Information Hungry
Organizations
Chapter3,publishedinJune,2007,andwrittenjointlybyIBMandVisionSolutions,dealswiththe
differentiation between companies in how they use information. At the core of the problem is the
distribution of a company’s data over a variety of systems and databases due to evolution and
acquisition. Data availability is the ability for every organization to consolidate this data and to
ensurethattherightinformationreachestherightpeopleattherighttime.
Threecharacteristicsofdatastandinthewayoffulldataavailability:
 Complexity – more applications, more nontraditional data, and more nontraditional
formats(digitalvideo,IM,email,wireless,etc.).
 Volume–studiesshowthatdatavolumesaredoublingeverysixtoeighteenmonths.
 Latency–thesinglebiggestimpedimenttoreal-timedecisionmaking.
Classically, data integration has been achieved with periodic ETL (extract, transform, and load)
utilities that run in off-hours. Real-time integration is more closely approached with application
integration or message-oriented middleware products. However, these approaches typically
requiresignificantapplicationmodificationand,insomecases,additionalintermediateservers.
Coming to the rescue are software-based replication products. These products work at the
database level, not the application level, and therefore are generally nonintrusive to the
applications. They are capable of on-the-fly data transformation to support replication between
heterogeneousdatabases.
3
©2009SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

An ultimate goal is the dynamic warehouse. Rather than receiving data in periodic batches, the
dynamic warehouse receives data changes in real time from applications throughout the
enterprise. It is available to any business process or user on demand. A powerful approach to
achieve the dynamic warehouse is today’s open-source standards. Using SOA (service-oriented
architecture) to packagelegacyservices and XML(extensible markuplanguage) tocommunicate
with the services, applications can be easily integrated as a set of services available to other
applications.
Coupledwithpowerfulreal-timeanalytics,userscanbeprovidedwiththecurrentinformationthey
need to optimize the business processes of the enterprise. Dynamic warehousing today is not a
product.Itisanapproachrequiring:
 informationintegrationtoaggregateandtransforminformationfromdisparatedatasources.
 data replication to acquire data from transaction databases and to support secondary
replicas.
 datamanagementtoensureacommonviewofcustomers,partners,andproducts.
 searchandtextanalyticstoextractusefulknowledgefromunstructuredinformation.
 publishingtonotifyapplicationsofactionableevents.
The benefits of information integration include speeding the time to market for new applications,
extending the value of existing investments,gaining further insights into the business, controlling
costs,andincreasingdeveloperproductivity.
Thechapterconcludeswithseveralcasestudiesshowingthebenefitsofdynamicwarehousing.
Chapter 4: Compliance and the New Reality for IT Resiliency
This chapter, published in February, 2008, is authored by Thomas M. Stockwell, an independent
industryanalyst.Itdealswiththemodern-daychallengesofregulatorycompliance.
Followingthecollapseof EnronCorporationin2001andthecollapseofits accountingfirm Arthur
Anderson for nefarious practices, Congress passed the Public Company Accountability Reform
and Investor Protection Act of 2002, better known as the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, or SOX. This act
was followed by a number of other regulatory acts, which together form a compliance burden on
allcompanies.
Compliance describes any set of rules, regulations, standards, or agreements that create a
framework for fulfilling an organization’s commitment to its customers, business partners,
shareholders, and government entities. As IT looks at how to be compliant, it should also be
looking for ways to make its infrastructure more resilient. The more resilient the IT infrastructure
