
-cardsymmetrickey(forissuermessages) -cardPIN
-cardprivatekey(forterminalmessages) -cardPINprivatekey
Table4:EMVCardSecretData
EMV Processing Flow
The processing of an EMV card transaction is shown in Figure 1. It comprises several steps, with
interaction between the card, the terminal, and the issuer. Processing time for an EMV transaction is
comparable to that for a magnetic-stripe transaction, where communication delays account for the
majorityofthetime
EMV transaction processing begins with some preliminary steps that help determine whether the
transaction should be handled online with the issuer or offline with no issuer involvement. Once this
decisionhasbeenmade,processingsplitsintotwodistinctflows–oneforonlinetransactionsandonefor
offlinetransactions.Part1ofthisarticledescribesthecommonprocessingflowandtheonlineprocessing
flow.Part2willdescribetheofflineprocessingflow.
PreliminaryProcessing
ApplicationSelection
The preliminary processing for a card transaction is shown in the flow chart of Figure 1. Each issuer can
define its own application. The issuer’s application determines how a card transaction must be handled.
This includes under which circumstances a transaction must be authorized online by the issuer, when it
can be executed offline without issuer involvement, and when it must be declined. An issuer may have
severalapplications.Forinstance,anissuermayallowacardtobeeitheracreditcardoradebitcard.
The applications of all issuers are registered with a central Certificate Authority that assigns a unique
application identification number (AID) to each application. In its static data, an EMV card carries a list of
AIDs of all applications that can be used with the card (often, there is only one). The terminal has a
similar listof allapplications itsupports.Theterminalreads theAID listfrom thecardandcreates a listof
common AIDs supported by both the terminal and the card. If there is more than one AID in the list, the
terminal may ask the cardholder via the PIN pad which application he wants (do you want to use your
cardasacreditcardorasadebitcard?).
If there is no common AID, the transaction may be rejected; or it may proceed as a magnetic stripe
transaction, depending upon how the terminal is configured. Attended POS terminals such as in stores
arerequiredtobemagnetic-stripecapable.
TerminalActionAnalysis
When an AID is selected, the terminal requests from the card the list of data elements that the terminal
needstoprocessthetransaction.Thecardmayalsorequestcertaindataelementsfromtheterminal.
Theterminalcheckstoseeifthecardcanbeused:
-IstheAIDonthecardacurrentversion?
-Arethererestrictionsonthecardastowhereitcanbeused?
-Isthecardwithinitseffectiveandexpirationdates?
If any of these conditions are not met, they are noted for later risk-management processing. However,
they do not lead immediately to a transaction rejection. For instance, an issuer may be willing to allow a
cardtobeusedforatimeperiodfollowingitsexpirationdatebutonlyforonlinetransactions.
5

Figure1:Figure1:EMVProcessingFlow
6

Among the data read from the card are the Issuer Action Codes (IAC). They are bit-mapped conditions
that specify criteria imposed by the issuer for how a transaction is to be processed. The terminal
combines them with a set of Terminal Action Codes (TAC) (also bit-mapped conditions) to determine if
thetransactionshouldbeprocessedonlineorofflineorbedeclined.
Most transactions will be processed online, sending the transaction data to the issuer for authorization.
However, in some cases, the transaction may be processed offline with no issuer involvement. This can
take place if there is no communication link (for instance, terminals used in airplanes to sell food, drinks,
and other items), if the communication link between the terminal and the issuer should fail (allowing a
retailertocontinuetoservicecustomerpaymentsatitsownrisk),orforverysmalltransactions.
As the terminal analyzes a transaction with respect to the IAC and TAC criteria, it creates a bit-mapped
Terminal Verification Result (TVR) that shows which conditions have been violated (such as card is
expired). When the terminal has made a decision as to how the transaction should be processed based
on the IAC, TAC, and other parameters (such as transaction amount), it sends the resulting TVR and
other transaction data to the card and indicates to the card the terminal’s suggestion relative to online
processing,offlineprocessing,orrejection.Thisisonlyanadvisorysuggestiontothecard.
FirstCard-ActionAnalysis
During the first card-action analysis, the card considers the terminal’s recommendation and makes its
own decision as to whether the transaction should be processed online, offline, or rejected. (The second
card-action analysis is taken when the card receives a response from the issuing bank, as described
later).
Based on the results that the terminal sends to the card, the card returns an application cryptogram (AC)
to the terminal that indicates how the transaction should be processed. The application cryptogram is
encodedwiththecard’sprivatekeyandisdecryptedbytheterminalwiththecard’spublickey.
TherearethreeACsthatthecardcanreturntotheterminal:
- aTransactionCryptogram(TC)thatindicatesthatthetransactioncanbeapprovedoffline.
- an Application Request Cryptogram (ARQC) that indicates that the transaction must be
approvedonline.
- an Application Authentication Cryptogram (AAC) that indicates that the transaction is to be
declined.
Thecardcanaccepttheterminal’s suggestion,or itcanforcethetransactiontobeprocessedonlineor to
be rejected. However, the card cannot force a transaction to be processed offline if the terminal has
indicatedthatitmustbeprocessedonline(itcannotreturnaTCiftheterminalhasaskedforanARQC).
OnlineTransactions
CardholderVerification
Ifthetransactionistobeprocessedonline,thenextstepistoverifythatthepersonpresentingthecardis
the legitimate cardholder. This is accomplished via the Cardholder Verification Method (CVM) that the
issuer has specified in its application stored on the card (see Table 1). Either of three methods can be
usedtoverifythecardholderforanonlinetransaction:
-onlinePIN
-signature
-noCVM.
Whatever methods the issuer selects may be arranged in priority order, or they may be selected
according to other transaction parameters. For instance, an ATM transaction may require a PIN. A POS
7

terminal with no PIN pad may call for a cardholder signature. A small transaction may require no
cardholder authentication. A transaction at an attended POS terminal may require both a PIN and a
signature.
If a PIN is selected, the cardholder enters the PIN into the terminal’s PIN pad. The terminal encrypts the
PIN with thecard’s public keyandsends ittothecard. Thecarddecrypts the PIN with its privatekeyand
comparesthePINenteredbythecardholdertothePINvaluestoredinitssecretdata.IfthePINis wrong,
theterminalisinformed.AccordingtoaPINcounter,thecardholdermaybegivenadditionalopportunities
toenter his PIN.If hereaches aspecifiedlimit,thetransactionis rejected;andthecardis blockedandno
longercanbeused.
OnlineTransactionAuthorization
When all data for an online transaction has been assembled by the card, the card asks for transaction
authorization by sending a message to the issuer. The card encrypts the message with the card’s
symmetric key shared with the issuer. This encryption represents a digital signature by the card and
guaranteestotheissuerthatthetransactioncomesfromavalidcard.
The issuer responds to the card with an encrypted ARPC (an Application Reply Cryptogram) that
indicateswhetherthetransactionisacceptedordeclined.
SecondCard-ActionAnalysis
When the card receives the issuer’s ARPC, it decrypts it using the issuer symmetric key. It is possible for
the card to reject an issuer authentication and to decide instead to abort the transaction, in which case a
reversing transaction is sent to the issuer. Based on the ARPC and the card’s final decision, the card will
inform the terminal to accept or decline the transaction. If a signature is required for an authorized
transaction,thecardholderwillbeaskedtosignacopyofthetransactionreceipt.
Following the transaction, the issuer may optionally send a script to the card to change certain
parameters in order to updatethe issuer’s risk-managementprocessing. For instance,the card’s PIN can
bechanged,thecardcanbeblockedorunblocked,andotherriskparameterscanbemodified.
The OmniPayments Financial Transaction Switch
OmniPayments (www.omnipayments.com) from Opsol Inc. (www.opsol.com) is an HP NonStop-based
financial transaction switch that interconnects POS terminals, ATMs, acquiring banks, and issuing banks
via any of the various financial transaction networks. OmniPayments supports all features required to
process EMV smart-card transactions, from support of EMV POS terminals and ATMs to the protocols
required to communicate with the issuing and acquiring banks. OmniPayments is currentlyhandling EMV
transactions with its internationalbankinginstallations andis readytohandlethesetransactions withU.S.
systemsasEMVtechnologytakesholdintheUnitedStates.
With successful implementations at many customer sites, OmniPayments is just one member of the Opsol
family of solutions for the financial industry. Opsol Integrators specializes in NonStop mission-critical
applicationsandisHPNonStop’slargestsystemintegrator.
Summary
In Part 1 of our article on EMV technology, we have described EMV smart cards and EMV terminals and
howtheymanagepaymenttransactionsthataretobeapprovedonlinebytheissuer.InPart2,weextend
thisdiscussiontohowEMVtransactionsaresecurelyprocessedofflinewithnodirectissuerinvolvement.
8

TheOmniPaymentsfinancialtransactionswitchsupportsEMVPOSterminalsandATMs, EMVprotocols,
and other EMV requirements necessary to bring the enhanced EMV security capabilities to the financial
paymentindustry.
Yash Kapadia is the founder and CEO of OmniPayments Inc., a leading HP NonStop system integrator
for Telco and Financial Services. Opsol’s OmniPayments solution is used by banks and retailers for
BASE24 replacement. Yash and his team provide several products and remote managed services for
NonStopcustomers.YashcanbereachedatYash@OmniPayments.comandat+1-408-666-9927.
9
