Cyber Threats Surpass Terrorism
March2013
Appearing before the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence in early March,
2013,JamesR.Clapper,DirectorofNationalIntelligence,testifiedthatcyberthreats
have now surpassed terrorism as the top security threat facing the United States.
This conclusion is documented in the United States Intelligence Community’s
assessmentofthreatstoU.S.nationalsecurity.1
The assessment noted that the world’s threat environment is changing rapidly and
radically. Attacks involving cyber weapons can be deniable by the perpetrators and
unattributable to any source. Destruction caused by these weapons may be
invisible,latent,and progressive.Thefactthatthere has been anattack maynot beimmediatelyobvious.
The effects of the attack may not be noticed until sometime after the attack has been launched and may
playoutoveraperiodoftime.
Cyber Threats
Our critical infrastructures, economy, and personal lives are becoming more entwined with technology
and particularly with the Internet. In some cases, technology is advancing faster than our ability to
understandthesecurityimplicationsandtomitigatepotentialrisks.
The United States intelligence community recognizes two types of cyber threats – cyber attacks and
cyberespionage.
CyberAttacks
A cyber attack is an offensive operation intended to create disastrous physical consequences, to deny
services, or to manipulate, disrupt, or delete data. Cyber attacks range from Distributed Denial of Service
(DDoS) attacks, such as those launched recently against major U.S. banks, to attacks that can disable
criticalinfrastructure.
Less sophisticated cyber warriors might deploy less sophisticated attacks for retribution or retaliation.
Though these attacks are likely to cause inconvenience rather than destruction, there is the chance for
unintended consequences due to unexpected system configurations or spillover to other nodes in a
networkedsystem.
1JamesR.Clapper,WorldwideThreatAssessmentoftheUSIntelligenceCommunity.
http://intelligence.senate.gov/130312/clapper.pdf
1
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

CyberEspionage
Cyber espionage involves the intrusion into government and corporate IT systems for the purpose of
acquiring confidential information. Such information might include classified government documents or
corporate trade secrets such as patent applications in progress.2 Most detected activity has targeted
unclassified networks connected to the Internet. However, much of the nation’s critical proprietarydata is
storedonthesenetworks.
Today’s highly networked information systems are providing opportunities for foreign intelligence
services, trusted insiders, and hackers to collect sensitive U.S. corporate and national security data. The
assessment notes that this may be allowing our adversaries to close the technological gap between our
respectivemilitaries.
Malware-as-a-Service
Cybercriminals arenowsellingtools openlyontheInternettoenableeasyaccess tocriticalsystems.The
Internet has become a source of free or low-cost malware that is easily customizable to meet every
hacker’s needs. Malware-as-a-Service significantly reduces the skill set needed by a cybercriminal to
launchautomatedattacks.3
These hardware and software packages can give governments and cybercriminals the capability to steal,
manipulate, or delete information on targeted systems. In addition, companies are selling professional-
quality technologies to support cyberoperations, often branding these tools as lawful intercept or
defensive security products. According to the assessment, foreign governments already use some of
thesetoolstotargetU.S.systems.
Examples of Recent and Ongoing Cyber Threats
BankDDoSAttacks
In September, 2012, a hacktivist group calling themselves the “Izz ad-Din al-Qassam Cyber Fighters”
vowed to take down the online portals of several major U.S. banks if the YouTube video “The Innocence
of Muslims” was not removed from the Internet. True to their word, they launched massive Distributed
Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks against Bank of America, Wells Fargo, PNC Bank, JPMorgan Chase,
U.S. Bank, Capital One, SunTrust Banks, and Regions Financial. Each attack took down the banks’
onlineportalsforadayormore.4
Theattacks weremassive,amountingtoattack datarates of almost100gigabits/second.This is anorder
ofmagnitude morethan standardDDoS attacks.Typically, DDoSattacks utilize infectednetworks of PCs
(botnets) to send traffic. However, this group used hundreds of thousands of volunteer PCs as well as
infectedservers,eachofwhichcouldgeneratethetrafficofthousandsofPCs.
The video was not removed, and in December the attacks were repeated against U.S. Bank, JPMorgan
Chase, Bank of America, PNC Financial Services Group, and SunTrust Bank.5 Recently, in early March,
2013, JPMorgan Chase was again attacked.6 The group vows to continue these attacks until the
offendingvideoisremovedfromYouTube.
2Arecentchangeinthepatentlawgivesprioritytothefirsttofile,notthefirsttoinvent.Ifapatentapplicationinprogresscanbe
stolen,anefariousactorcanfilethepatentapplicationfirstandbeawardedthepatent.
3MalwareasaService,AvailabilityDigest;December2011.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0612/malware.pdf
4IslamicHactivistsAttackU.S.Banks,AvailabilityDigest;October2012.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0710/bank_attacks.pdf
5DDoSAttacksonU.S.BanksContinue,AvailabilityDigest;January2013.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0801/more_bank_attacks.pdf
6CyberattackstopsaccesstoJPMorganChasesite,Reuters;March13,2013.
2
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Stuxnet
The Stuxnet worm7 is designed to attack and sabotage control systems used in power grids, pipelines,
nuclear plants, railroads, and other facilities controlled by computers. Stuxnet is a very targeted piece of
malware. It looks for specific industrial-control systems. When one of the right type is found, Stuxnet
allowshackerstotakecontrolofthesystemandtomanipulateitremotelywithouttheoperatorknowing.
Stuxnet is ingenious. It has two major components. One intercepts valid commands being sent to the
devices and replaces them with potentially dangerous commands generated automatically or by remote
hackers. The other secretly records what normal operations at the facility look like and plays these back
totheplantoperatorssothatitappearstothemasiftheplantisoperatingnormally.
The version of Stuxnet that was first detected targeted centrifuges that Iran was using to enrich Uranium.
Itcausedthecentrifugestospinout-of-controlathighspeedswiththeintenttodestroythem.
The attackers have never been identified, but the virus was so complex and sophisticated that suspicion
is focused on a government attacker. Though never confirmed, the suspicion is that the attackers were
IsraelandtheUnitedStates.
ChineseCyberEspionage
Manyinfections incorporateandgovernmentsystemshavebeentracedtoaChinesemilitaryfacility.The
ChinesedenyanytypeofcyberactivityagainsttheUnitedStates.Theattackscontinue.
An interesting example occurred in October, 2012. The New York Times was preparing to expose a
multibillion dollar fortune obtained through perhaps nefarious business dealings by relatives of Wen
Jiabao, China’s prime minister. It was then that suspected Chinese hackers infiltrated the Times’
computer systems and stole the passwords of its reporters and other employees. Though the attackers
could have wreaked havoc on the Times’ computers, they did not. It seems their purpose was to identify
Chinese citizens who may have provided information to the New York Times concerning Mr. Jiabao’s
businessdealings.
Security expert firm Mandiant was hired by the Times and identified the attacks as similar to earlier
attacksperpetratedbytheChinesemilitary.Theattackswerenotmadedirectlybutratherthroughseveral
computersatU.S.universitiesinanattempttohidethesourceoftheattacks.
The security experts found evidence that the hackers stole the passwords of every employee of the
Times and used these passwords to gain access to the computers of 53 of the employees. The hackers
evidently initiated their attack by snooping around for two weeks through back doors that they had
opened in the systems until they found the domain controller that contained the user names and their
passwords.
It is strongly suspected that the hackers gained access to the Times’ systems through a spear-phishing
attack thatrequires justoneemployeetodownloadjustonemalicious emailthat willinstallmalware.This
malware can then siphon off oceans of data, including keystrokes, screen images, documents,
microphones,andcameras.
Over the course of three months, the attackers installed 45 pieces of malware. The Times’ antivirus
protectionfoundonlyoneofthemandquarantinedit.
MandiantreportsthatithastracedseveralothercorporatecyberattackstotheChinesemilitary.
7Stuxnet–TheWorld’sFirstCyberWeapon,AvailabilityDigest;March2011.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0603/stuxnet.pdf
3
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Terrorism
According to the intelligence assessment, terrorism threats are in a transition period as the global jihadist
movement becomes increasingly decentralized. The United States also is concerned about potential
threatsfromIranandHezbollah.
 Al-Qa’idaintheArabianPeninsula(AQAP)willcontinuetoplanattacksonU.S.soil.
 Al-Qa’ida-Inspired Homegrown Violent Extremists (HVE), though having been inspired by
successessuchasthe2009attack atFortHood,willbeinvolvedinfewerthantendomesticplots
peryear.
 Core Al-Qa’ida has been degraded by senior personnel losses to the point that the group is
probablyunabletocarryoutcomplex,large-scaleattacksintheWest.
 Al-Qa’idainIraq(AQI)’sgoalsinIraqwilltakeprecedenceoverU.S.plotting.
 Somalia-basedal-Shabaabwillremainfocusedonlocalandregionalchallenges.
 Al-Qa’ida in the Land of the Islamic Maghreb’s (AQIM) will focus on local, U.S., and Western
interestsinNorthandWestAfrica.
 Nigeria-based Boko Haram will continue to aim at destabilization of the country and to advance
extremeIslamicrule.
 Pakistan-based Lashkar-e-Tayibba (LT) will be the most problematic of the Pakistani militant
groupsandmayevolveintoaHAMAS/Hezbollah-likepresenceinPakistan.
 Iran may be more willing to seize opportunities to attack within the United States but prefers to
avoiddirectconfrontationasitspriorityisregimepreservation.
 Hezbollah overseas terrorist activity is focused on Israel, and it is reluctant to face the U.S.
outsideoftheMiddleEast.
Why Are Cyber Threats More of a Concern Than Terrorism
There are several reasons why the U.S. assessment is that cyber threats are now more worrisome than
terrorism:
 The incidence of cyber threats is far greater than the incidence of terror plots, especially in the
continental United States. There are literallymillions of malicious probes made everydayagainst
our critical IT government and corporate infrastructures. Fortunately, few of these succeed; but
the rate of system infections is significant. Those that do succeed, such as the bank DDoS
attacksandtheexposureofsecretgovernmentdocumentsbyWikiLeaks,havecausedsignificant
damage.
Terroristattacks,whichcanresultinloss oflifeor property,seldom succeedintheU.S.Manyare
thwartedbylawenforcementandintelligenceagencies.
 Asuccessfulcyberattack cancauseagreatdealmoredamagethanasuccessfulterroristattack.
For instance, it is unlikely that a terrorist attack could take down the entire electrical grid in the
U.S.However,thisisnotaninconceivableresultfromasophisticatedcyberattack.
4
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Fortunately, the intelligence community does not see an immediate threat to our critical infrastructure.
Thereportstates:
“We judge that there is a remote chance of a major cyber attack against US critical infrastructure
systems during the next two years that would result in long-term, wide-scale disruption of services,
such as a regional power outage. The level of technical expertise and operational sophistication
required for such an attack … will be out of reach for most actors during this time frame. Advanced
cyber actors – such as China and Russia – are unlikely to launch such a devastating attack against
theUnitedStatesoutsideofamilitaryconflictorcrisisthattheybelievethreatenstheirvitalinterests.”
U.S. Cyber Counterattacks
Certainly, the U.S. has its own cyber counterattack strategies should it suffer a major attack. Network
World reported that if the United States finds itself under a major cyber attack aimed at undermining the
nation’s critical information infrastructure, the Department of Defense is prepared, based on the authority
of the president, to launch a cyber counterattack or an actual bombing of an attack source if the attack is
determinedtooriginatefromaforeigncountry.8However,thepreferredroutewouldbetowarnthesource
toshutdowntheattackbeforeamilitaryresponseisinitiated.
The group responsible for analyzing the need for a cyber counterstrike is the National Cyber Response
Coordination Group (NCRCG). Its three key members are the US-CERT computer-readiness team (part
of the Department of Homeland Security), the Department of Justice, and the Defense Department. A big
problem the group faces is how to coordinate if a significant portion of the Internet or traditional voice
communicationsaresuddenlystruckdownbyacyberattack.
So far, there has been no major cybersecurity event against the United States that has prompted the
needfor anationalresponse.Nonetheless,theU.S. is trainingcyber fighters todo network warfare.Itwill
havefightersincyberspace.
Summary
We can see from our Never Again stories the growing predominance of cyber threats. Many of them can
take our systems down for hours or days. If we are to provide continuous availability of our IT services,
we must begin to extend our focus from hardware, software, human, and environmental faults to external
attacksfrommaliciousplayers.
Someoftheseattacksareintrusionsintendedtospyonusortostealourdata.Others,suchastheDDoS
attacks that hit the major U.S. banks, are intended to take down our systems. Today, these latter attacks
are generally meant to exact retribution for some imagined or real grievance. Tomorrow, they may be
intendedtodosignificantharmtousforcompetitiveornational-securityreasons.
8U.S.cybercounterattack:Bomb‘emonewayoranother,NetworkWorld;February8,2007.
5
©2013SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com