What’s Your Concern – MTR or MTBF?
November2010
Fast recovery from a fault is what users look for. But frequent failures can drive the system
operators to a frenzy. So what should we be seeking in a highly available system – fast recovery
orinfrequentfailures?Let’slookatthisquestionfurther.
Is the Availability Barrier MTR?
Continuous-availability systems provide (nearly) 100% uptime by recovering from a fault so
rapidlythatnoonenoticesthattherehasbeenoutage(oratleastnooneisinconveniencedbyit).
In most of our discussions in the Availability Digest, we have for this reason focused on how to
achieveveryfastrecoveries.
A leading example of a continuously available system is an active/active system,1 in which all
nodes are actively processing transactions and in which a transaction can be routed to any node
for processing. Should a node fail, all that needs to be done is to reroute traffic to surviving
nodes. With the right architecture, this can be done in seconds to subseconds.2 Who will even
notice?
Followingthisphilosophy,wearguedinourarticleentitledWhatIstheAvailabilityBarrier?3 thatit
is the recovery time, or MTR (mean time to recover), that is important to commercial data
processing.Whilethisistruefortheusercommunity,itignoresanotherveryimportantcommunity
–thesystemoperators.
What About MTBF?
At a recent Business Continuity SIG (Significant Interest Group) at HPTF (the HP Technology
Forum), the HP liaison expressed some dismay at this interpretation of MTR being all important.
He pointed out that to the system operators, an outage is an outage. Whether recovery is in
seconds, minutes, or hours, the system must still be repaired; and that takes a lot of effort and
knowledgeonthepartoftheoperationsstaff.
The rate of failures is the major impact on them.With every failure, they must scurry and correct
the fault. The failure interval, or time between failures (MTBF – the mean time between failures),
1WhatisActive/Active?,AvailabilityDigest;October2006.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0101/what_is_active-active.pdf.
2AchievingFastFailoverinActive/ActiveSystems–Parts1and2,AvailabilityDigest;August/Sept2009.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0408/user_redirection.pdf.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0409/user_redirection_2.pdf.
3WhatIstheAvailabilityBarrier,AvailabilityDigest;March2010.
http://www.availabilitydigest.com/public_articles/0503/availability_barrier.pdf.
1
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

maybe moreimportanttothem thanMTR.Even if the system is aredundantsystem,suchas an
active/active system with automated rapid recovery, the operations staff must correct the fault
beforeasecondfaultcanindeedtakethesystemdownforanextendedperiodoftime.
An Example
Consider a system with three 9s availability (it is up 99.9% of the time). If you are a user of this
system,wouldyouratherbedownfor:
• onesecondeveryseventeenminutes?(yourPCprobablydoesthis).
• oneminuteonceaday?(aminoraggravation).
• onehouronceeverysixweeks?(amajoraggravation).
• onedayeverythreeyears?(perhapsmajordamagetoyourcompany).
• oneweekevery20years?(wouldyourcompanysurvivethis?).
As an end-user, you might choose one second every seventeen minutes or one minute a day.
You probably won’t notice the one-second outage, and a one-minute outage might be nothing
morethanalittleannoying.Certainly,neither willcauseyoutostopwork andcallthehelpdesk to
findoutwhatisgoingon.
Butwhatisgoingonbehindthescenes?Theone-secondoutageiscausingthesystemoperators
to track down and fix somesort of problem four times an hour. This is probablyintolerable – they
may not be able to keep up, meaning that the system may be heading for disaster with a dual
outageofsomecriticalcomponent.
Theone-minuteoutage is a little better, but the staffmuststill work prettyquickly. Whatif amulti-
hour recoveryof asystem is required?Whatif therepair requires a new part that maytakeafew
days to acquire? Several of these incidents could well lead to a shaky system with several
simultaneousfaultsunderrepair.
The staff will probably find an outage every six weeks quite acceptable. The workload to recover
from faults will not be that great, and it is unlikely that there will be several failed components
outstanding at the same time. But users will now surely be affected as they wait around for the
systemtocomeup.
What will management think? That depends upon the application. Certainly, the amount of
downtime is important to them. But we have assumed a three-9s system, which by definition
causes eight hours of downtime per year. Given that, the one-hour-every-six-weeks scenario
might be a good choice. The impact of downtime may well be minimal – one hour of employees
sitting around (assuming that this is not a critical application, in which case a three-9s system
shouldn’tbeusedanyway).Thechanceofmultiplefaultsunderrepairwillbeminimal.
It is interesting to note that typical parameters today for a three-9s commodityWindows or Linux
server are in the order of four hours of downtime every six months. This is what we have learned
tolivewith.
Thus, MTR and MTBF are both important to some segment of the user community. One should
notbeoptimizedintheabsenceofconsiderationoftheother.
Calculating MTBF
These considerations raise the question of how to calculate MTBF. If we have a system
comprising several components, the failure of any one of which will cause the system to fail, and
each with its own MTBF, what is the MTBF of the system? Obviously, it is not just a matter of
addingtheMTBFs.
2
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

Let us consider a simple system comprising a network, an application server, and a database
server,asshowninFigure1.Wewilluselowercasetodenotecomponentparametersandupper
casetodenotesystemparameters.
Themtbfofthenetworkis24months(two years).Themtbfoftheapplicationserverissixmonths
(one-half a year). Themtbfof themirroreddatabase is 60 months (five years).What is the MTBF
thatwecanexpectofthesystem?
applicationserver
data
mtbf=6months
base
network mtr=4hours mtbf=60months
mtbf=24months mtr=24hours
mtr=1hour
Figure1:MTBFExample
We cannot add mtbfs. But we can add failure frequencies. Let us take a five-year period. The
network will fail 2.5 times in five years. The application server will fail ten times in five years. The
database server will fail once in five years. (They are all averages, of course). Thus, we can
expect the system to fail 2.5+10+1 = 13.5 times in a five-year period. This is a failure every 4.44
months (the system’s MTBF). Note that the MTBF of the system is less than that of its weakest
link,theapplicationserverinthiscase.
For the mathematically inclined, let mtbf be the mtbf of component i. Then the system MTBF is
i
thereciprocalofthesumofthereciprocalsofthecomponentmtbfs:
1 1
MTBF 
1 1 1 1
  ... 
mtbf mtbf mtbf mtbf
1 2 3 i i
Conforming MTBF with MTR and Availability
JusthowdoesthiscorrelatewithsystemMTRandsystemavailability,A?
First of all, with the mtbf and mtr component parameters given in Figure 1, we can calculate the
availability, a, of each component. Remembering that a = (mtbf-mtr)/mtbf, and using 720 hours
permonth,wefind
a(network)=(24x720-1)/(24x720)=0.999942
a(applicationserver)=(6x720-4)/(6x720)=0.999074
a(databaseserver)=(60x720-24)/(60x720)=0.999444
This is a serial system in which the failure of any component will cause a system failure. The
system willbeupifthenetwork isupandiftheapplicationserverisupandifthedatabaseserver
isup.Sincetheprobabilitythatacomponentwillbeupisitsavailability,thesystemavailability,A,
istheproductofitscomponentavailabilities:
A=0.999942x0.999074x0.999444=0.998461
The average recovery time for the system, MTR, can be found from the basic availability
equation, A = (MTBF-MTR)/MTBF, or MTR = MTBF(1-A). Since we have calculated an MTBF of
4.44months,wehave
3
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com

MTR=(4.44x720)(1-0.998461)=4.9hours
Thus, the system of Figure 1 has an MTBF of 4.44 months, an MTR of 4.9 hours, and an
availability of 0.998461. In round terms, it has an MTBF of 4 ½ months, a five-hour MTR, and an
availabilityofalittlelessthanthree9s.
Summary
There are more than just the users of a system who are interested in the availabilityof a system.
Therearealsothesystemoperatorsandmanagement.
Users will typically be interested in recovery time, MTR. The faster the recovery time, the less
impact an outage has on them. System operators will typically be more interested in the failure
interval (MTBF) since that defines their workload in terms of component repairs (though fast
recovery helps them by minimizing the stress to get a component fixed). Management is
interested in minimizing downtime and in balancing MTR and MTBF for the benefit of the
enterprise.
Note that an active/active system can achieve all of these goals – recovery times measured in
seconds, downtimes of seconds per year (six 9s is 30 seconds of downtime per year), and
MTBFsofcenturies.
4
©2010SombersAssociates,Inc.,andW.H.Highleyman
Fordiscussion,contacteditorest.com