cluded that the SE mismatched due to a line out-
FirstEnergy’s control facility. This occurred
age. His experience allowed him to isolate the
because they had lost grid power and switched
outage to the Stuart-Atlanta 345-kV line (which
over to their emergency power supply.
tripped about an hour earlier at 14:02 EDT). He
tooktheStuart-AtlantalineoutofserviceintheSE At 15:42 EDT, a FirstEnergy dispatcher realized
model and got a valid solution. that the AEPR was not working and made techni-
cal support staff aware of the problem.
Alsoat15:08EDT,theFirstEnergyprimaryserver
was restored. ACE calculations and control sys- Endnotes
tems were now running on the primary server. 1 http://www.nrc.gov/reading-rm/doc-collections/news/
AEPR continued to malfunction, unbeknownst to 2003/03-108.html.
the FirstEnergy grid operators. 2 http://www.fbi.gov/congress/congress03/mefford090403.
htm.
At 15:09 EDT, the MISO EMS engineer went to 3 http://www.fbi.gov/congress/congress03/mefford090403.
the control room to tell the grid operators that he htm.
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  137



10.
Recommendations to Prevent or Minimize
the Scope of Future Blackouts
Introduction bulk power systems. Market mechanisms
should be used where possible, but in circum-
stances where conflicts between reliability and
As reported in previous chapters, the blackout on
commercial objectives cannot be reconciled,
August 14, 2003, was preventable. It had several
they must be resolved in favor of high reliabil-
direct causes and contributing factors, including:
ity.2
  Failure to maintain adequate reactive power
support 2.Regulators and consumers should recognize
that reliability is not free, and that maintaining
  Failuretoensureoperationwithinsecurelimits itrequiresongoinginvestmentsandoperational
expenditures by many parties. Regulated com-
  Inadequate vegetation management
panies will not make such outlays without
  Inadequate operator training assurancesfromregulatorsthatthecostswillbe
recoverable through approved electric rates,
  Failure to identify emergency conditions and andunregulatedcompanieswillnotmakesuch
communicate that status to neighboring outlaysunlesstheybelievetheiractionswillbe
systems profitable.3
  Inadequate regional-scale visibility over the
3.Recommendations have no value unless they
bulk power system.
are implemented. Accordingly, the Task Force
Further, as discussed in Chapter 7, after each emphasizes strongly that North American gov-
major blackout in North America since 1965, an ernments and industry should commit them-
expertteamofinvestigatorshasprobedthecauses selves to working together to put into effect the
oftheblackout,writtendetailedtechnicalreports, suiteofimprovementsmappedoutbelow.Suc-
andissuedlistsofrecommendationstopreventor cessinthisareawillrequireparticularattention
minimize the scope of future blackouts. Yet sev- to the mechanisms proposed for performance
eral of the causes of the August 14 blackout are monitoring, accountability of senior manage-
strikinglysimilartothoseoftheearlierblackouts. ment, and enforcement of compliance with
Clearly,effortstoimplementearlierrecommenda- standards.
tions have not been adequate.1 Accordingly, the
recommendations presented below emphasize 4.The bulk power systems are among the most
comprehensiveness, monitoring, training, and critical elements of our economic and social
enforcement of reliability standards when neces- infrastructure. Although the August 14 black-
sary to ensure compliance. outwasnotcausedbymaliciousacts,anumber
of security-related actions are needed to
It is useful to think of the recommendations pre- enhance reliability.
sented below in terms of four broad themes:
Over the past decade or more, electricity demand
1.GovernmentbodiesintheU.S.andCanada,reg- has increased and the North American intercon-
ulators, the North American electricity indus- nections have become more densely woven and
try, and related organizations should commit heavily loaded, over more hours of the day and
themselves to making adherence to high reli- year.Inmanygeographicareas,thenumberofsin-
ability standards paramount in the planning, gle or multiple contingencies that could create
design, and operation of North America’s vast serious problems has increased. Operating the
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  139

grids at higher loadings means greater stress on Implementation of the recommendations pre-
equipment and a smaller range of options and a sented below will address all remaining issues,
shorterperiodoftimefordealingwithunexpected through the ongoing work of government bodies
problems. The system operator’s job has become andagenciesintheU.S.andCanada,theelectric-
more challenging, leading to the need for more ity industry, and the non-governmental institu-
sophisticated grid management tools and more tions responsible for the maintenance of electric
demandingoperatortrainingprogramsandcertifi- reliability in North America.
cation requirements.
The recommendations below focus on changes of Recommendations
many kinds that are needed to ensure reliability,
for both the summer of 2004 and for the years to Forty-six numbered recommendations are pre-
follow. Making these changes will require higher sentedbelow,groupedintofoursubstantiveareas.
and broader awareness of the importance of reli- Some recommendations concern subjects that
ability,andsomeofthemmayrequiresubstantial were addressed in some detail by commenters on
newinvestments.However,thecostofnotmaking the Interim Report or participants in the Task
these changes, i.e., the cost of chronic large-scale Force’s two technical conferences. In such cases,
blackouts, would be far higher than the cost of thecommentersarelistedintheEndnotessection
addressing the problem. Estimates of the cost of of this chapter. Citation in the endnotes does not
theAugust14blackoutrangebetween$4and$10 necessarilymeanthatthecommentersupportsthe
billion (U.S.).4 position expressed in the recommendation. A
“table of contents” overview of the recommenda-
The need for additional attention to reliability is tionsisprovidedinthetextboxonpages141-142.
not necessarily at odds with increasing competi-
tion and the improved economic efficiency it Group I. Institutional Issues
bringstobulkpowermarkets.Reliabilityandeco-
Related to Reliability
nomic efficiency can be compatible, but this out-
come requires more than reliance on the laws of 1. Make reliability standards mandatory
physics and the principles of economics. It and enforceable, with penalties for non-
requires sustained, focused efforts by regulators,
compliance.5
policy makers, and industry leaders to strengthen
and maintain the institutions and rules needed to AppropriatebranchesofgovernmentintheUnited
protect both of these important goals. Regulators StatesandCanadashouldtakeactionasrequired
tomakereliabilitystandardsmandatoryand
must ensure that competition does not erode
enforceable,andtoprovideappropriatepenalties
incentives to comply with reliability require-
fornoncompliance.
ments, and that reliability requirements do not
serve as a smokescreen for noncompetitive
A. Action by the U.S. Congress
practices.
TheU.S.Congressshouldenactreliabilitylegisla-
Themetricforgaugingachievementofthisgoal— tion no less stringent than the provisions now
making the changes needed to maintain a high included in the pending comprehensive energy
level of reliability for the next decade or longer— bills,H.R.6andS.2095.Specifically,theseprovi-
willbethedegreeofcomplianceobtainedwiththe sions would require that:
recommendations presented below. The single
  Reliability standards are to be mandatory and
mostimportantstepintheUnitedStatesisforthe
enforceable, with penalties for noncompliance.
U.S.Congresstoenactthereliabilityprovisionsin
pending energy bills (H.R. 6 and S. 2095). If that   Reliabilitystandardsshouldbedevelopedbyan
can be done, many of the actions recommended independent, international electric reliability
below could be accomplished readily in the organization (ERO) with fair stakeholder repre-
course of implementing the legislation. sentation in the selection of its directors and
balanced decision-making in any ERO commit-
Some commenters asserted that the Interim tee or subordinate organizational structure.
Reportdidnotanalyzeallfactorstheybelievemay (See text box on NERC and an ERO below.)
have contributed to the August 14 blackout.
140  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

Overview of Task Force Recommendations: Titles Only
Group I. Institutional Issues Related to Reliability
1. Make reliability standards mandatory and enforceable, with penalties for noncompliance.
2. Develop a regulator-approved funding mechanism for NERC and the regional reliability councils,
to ensure their independence from the parties they oversee.
3. Strengthen the institutional framework for reliability management in North America.
4. Clarify that prudent expenditures and investments for bulk system reliability (including invest-
ments in new technologies) will be recoverable through transmission rates.
5. Track implementation of recommended actions to improve reliability.
6. FERC should not approve the operation of new RTOs or ISOs until they have met minimum
functional requirements.
7. Require any entity operating as part of the bulk power system to be a member of a regional reli-
ability council if it operates within the council’s footprint.
8. Shield operators who initiate load shedding pursuant to approved guidelines from liability or
retaliation.
9. Integrate a “reliability impact” consideration into the regulatory decision-making process.
10. Establish an independent source of reliability performance information.
11. Establish requirements for collection and reporting of data needed for post-blackout analyses.
12. Commission an independent study of the relationships among industry restructuring, competi-
tion, and reliability.
13. DOE should expand its research programs on reliability-related tools and technologies.
14. Establish a standing framework for the conduct of future blackout and disturbance
investigations.
Group II. Support and Strengthen NERC’s Actions of February 10, 2004
15. Correct the direct causes of the August 14, 2003 blackout.
16. Establish enforceable standards for maintenance of electrical clearances in right-of-way areas.
17. Strengthen the NERC Compliance Enforcement Program.
18. Support and strengthen NERC’s Reliability Readiness Audit Program.
19. Improve near-term and long-term training and certification requirements for operators, reliability
coordinators, and operator support staff.
20. Establish clear definitions for normal, alert and emergency operational system conditions. Clarify
roles, responsibilities, and authorities of reliability coordinators and control areas under each
condition.
21. Make more effective and wider use of system protection measures.
22. Evaluate and adopt better real-time tools for operators and reliability coordinators.
23. Strengthen reactive power and voltage control practices in all NERC regions.
24. Improve quality of system modeling data and data exchange practices.
25. NERC should reevaluate its existing reliability standards development process and accelerate the
adoption of enforceable standards.
26. Tighten communications protocols, especially for communications during alerts and emergen-
cies. Upgrade communication system hardware where appropriate.
27. Develop enforceable standards for transmission line ratings.
28. Require use of time-synchronized data recorders.
29. Evaluate and disseminate lessons learned during system restoration.
30. Clarify criteria for identification of operationally critical facilities, and improve dissemination of
updated information on unplanned outages.
31. Clarify that the transmission loading relief (TLR) process should not be used in situations involv-
ing an actual violation of an Operating Security Limit. Streamline the TLR process.
(continued on page 142)
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  141

Overview of Task Force Recommendations: Titles Only (Continued)
Group III. Physical and Cyber Security of North American Bulk Power Systems
32.Implement NERC IT standards.
33.Develop and deploy IT management procedures.
34.Develop corporate-level IT security governance and strategies.
35.Implement controls to manage system health, network monitoring, and incident management.
36.Initiate U.S.-Canada risk management study.
37.Improve IT forensic and diagnostic capabilities.
38.Assess IT risk and vulnerability at scheduled intervals.
39.Develop capability to detect wireless and remote wireline intrusion and surveillance.
40.Control access to operationally sensitive equipment.
41.NERC should provide guidance on employee background checks.
42.Confirm NERC ES-ISAC as the central point for sharing security information and analysis.
43.Establish clear authority for physical and cyber security.
44.Develop procedures to prevent or mitigate inappropriate disclosure of information.
Group IV. Canadian Nuclear Power Sector
45. The Task Force recommends that the Canadian Nuclear Safety Commission request Ontario
Power Generation and Bruce Power to review operating procedures and operator training associ-
ated with the use of adjuster rods.
46. The Task Force recommends that the Canadian Nuclear Safety Commission purchase and install
backup generation equipment.
  Reliability standards should allow, where applied more broadly. For example, in the
appropriate, flexibility to accommodate Western U.S. and Canada, many members of the
regional differences, including more stringent WesternElectricityCoordinatingCouncil(WECC)
reliability requirements in some areas, but include clauses in contracts for the purchase of
regional deviations should not be allowed to wholesale power that require the parties to com-
lead to lower reliability expectations or ply with reliability standards. In the areas of the
performance. U.S. and Canada covered by the Northeast Power
CoordinatingCouncil(NPCC),partiesfoundnotto
  AnERO-proposedstandardormodificationtoa
beincompliancewithNERCandNPCCreliability
standard should take effect within the United
requirements are subject to escalating degrees of
States upon approval by the Federal Energy
scrutiny by their peers and the public. Both of
Regulatory Commission (FERC).
these approaches have had positive effects. FERC
  FERC should remand to the ERO for further should examine other approaches as well, and
considerationaproposedreliabilitystandardor work with state regulatory authorities to ensure
a modification to a reliability standard that it
disapproves of in whole or in part, with expla-
nation for its concerns and rationale.
NERC and the ERO
B. Action by FERC
If the proposed U.S. reliability legislation
Intheabsenceofsuchreliabilitylegislation,FERC
passes, the North American Electric Reliability
should review its statutory authorities under
Council (NERC) may undertake various organi-
existing law, and to the maximum extent permit-
zational changes and seek recognition as the
ted by those authorities, act to enhance reliability
electricreliabilityorganization(ERO)calledfor
by making compliance with reliability standards
in H.R. 6 and S. 2095. For simplicity of presen-
enforceable in the United States. In doing so,
tation, the many forward-looking references
FERCshouldconsultwithstateregulators,NERC,
below to “NERC” are intended to apply to the
and the regional reliability councils to determine
ERO if the legislation is passed, and to NERC if
whethercertainenforcementpracticesnowinuse
the legislation is not passed.
in some parts of the U.S. and Canada might be
142  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

that any other appropriate actions to make reli- basedonasurchargeintransmissionrates.The
ability standards enforceable are taken. purposewouldbetoensurethatNERCandthe
councilsareappropriatelyfundedtomeettheir
Action by FERC under its existing authorities changingresponsibilitieswithoutdependenceon
would not lessen the need for enactment of reli- thepartiesthattheyoversee.Note:Implementation
abilitylegislationbytheCongress.ManyU.S.par- ofthisrecommendationshouldbecoordinated
tiesthatshouldberequiredbylawtocomplywith withthereviewcalledforinRecommendation3
reliability requirements are not subject to the concerningthefutureroleoftheregionalcouncils.
Commission’s full authorities under the Federal
Power Act.
NERC’scurrent$13million/yearbudgetisfunded
aspartoftheduesthattransmissionowners,gen-
C. Action by Appropriate Authorities in Canada
erators, and other market participants pay to the
The interconnected nature of the transmission
ten regional reliability councils, which then fund
gridrequiresthatreliabilitystandardsbeidentical
NERC. This arrangement makes NERC subject to
or compatible on both sides of the Canadian/U.S.
theinfluenceofthereliabilitycouncils,whichare
border.SeveralprovincialgovernmentsinCanada
in turn subject to the influence of their control
havealreadydemonstratedsupportformandatory
areasandothermembers.Italsocompromisesthe
and enforceable reliability standards and have
independence of both NERC and the councils in
eitherpassedlegislationorhavetakenstepstoput
relationtotheentitieswhoseactionstheyoversee,
in place the necessary framework for implement-
and makes it difficult for them to act forcefully
ing such standards in Canada. The federal and
and objectively to maintain the reliability of the
provincialgovernmentsshouldworktogetherand
