the afternoon of August 14) indicates that tagged
short-circuit to ground occurred in each case.
transactions for the 15:00 EDT hour across Ohio
had minimal impact on the overloaded lines. As The investigation’s field team
Cause 3
discussed in Chapter 4, this analysis showed that inspected the right of way in the
Inadequate
after the loss of the Hanna-Juniper 345 kV line, Tree location indicated by the relay
Star-South Canton was loaded primarily with Trimming digital fault recorders, in the FE
flows to serve native and network loads, deliver- portion of the line. They found
ing makeup energy for the loss of Eastlake 5, pur- debris from trees and vegetation that had been
chased from PJM (342 MW) and Ameren (126 felled. At this location the conductor height
MW).Theonlywaythatthesehighloadingscould was44feet9inches(13.6meters).Theidentifiable
have been relieved would not have been from the tree remains measured 30 feet (9.1 meters) in
redispatchthatAEPrequested,butratherfromsig- height, although the team could not verify the
nificant load-shedding by FE in the Cleveland location of the stump, nor find all sections of the
area. tree. A nearby cluster of trees showed significant
fault damage, including charred limbs and
The primary tool MISO uses for
Cause 4 de-barking from fault current. Further, topsoil in
assessing reliability on key
Inadequate
RC Diagnostic flowgates (specified groupings of
Support transmission lines or equipment Figure 5.11. Star-South Canton 345-kV Line
that sometimes have less transfer
capabilitythandesired)istheflowgatemonitoring
tool. After the Harding-Chamberlin 345-kV line
outageat15:05EDT,theflowgatemonitoringtool
producedincorrect(obsolete)results,becausethe
outagewasnotreflectedinthemodel.Asaresult,
the tool assumed that Harding-Chamberlin was
still available and did not predict an overload for
loss of the Hanna-Juniper 345-kV line. When
Hanna-Junipertrippedat15:32EDT,theresulting
overload was detected by MISO’s SCADA and set
off alarms to MISO’s system operators, who then
phoned FE about it.27 Because both MISO’s
state estimator and its flowgate monitoring tool
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  63

theareaofthetreetrunkwasdisturbed,discolored System impacts of the 345-kV
Cause 2
and broken up, a common indication of a higher Inadequate failures. According to extensive
magnitude fault or multiple faults. Analysis of Situational investigation team modeling,
another stump showed that a fourteen year-old Awareness there were no contingency limit
tree had recently been violations as of 15:05 EDT before
removed from the middle of Recommendations the loss of the Harding-Chamberlin 345-kV line.
16, page 154; 27, page 162
the right-of-way.28 Figure 5.12 shows the line loadings estimated by
investigationteammodelingasthe345-kVlinesin
After the Star-South Canton line was lost, flows
northeast Ohio began to trip. Showing line load-
increased greatly on the 138-kV system toward
ingsonthe345-kVlinesasapercentofnormalrat-
Clevelandandareavoltagelevelsbegantodegrade
ing, it tracks how the loading on each line
on the 138-kV and 69-kV system. At the same
increased as each subsequent 345-kV and 138-kV
time, power flows increased on the Sammis-Star
line tripped out of service between 15:05 EDT
345-kVlineduetothe138-kVlinetrips—theonly
(Harding-Chamberlin, the first line above to
remaining paths into Cleveland from the south.
stair-step down) and 16:06 EDT (Dale-West Can-
Cause 2 FE’soperatorswerenotawarethat ton). As the graph shows, none of the 345- or
Inadequate the system was operating outside 138-kV lines exceeded their normal ratings until
Situational first contingency limits after the after the combined trips of Harding-Chamberlin
Awareness Harding-Chamberlin trip (for the andHanna-Juniper.Butimmediatelyafterthesec-
possible loss of Hanna-Juniper or ond line was lost, Star-South Canton’s loading
the Perry unit), because they did not conduct jumpedfromanestimated82%ofnormalto120%
a contingency analysis.29 The investigation team of normal (which was still below its emergency
has not determined whether the system status rating)andremainedatthe120%levelfor10min-
information used by FE’s utes before tripping out. To the right, the graph
state estimator and contin- Recommendation shows the effects of the 138-kV line failures
22, page159
gency analysis model was (discussed in the next phase) upon the
being accurately updated. two remaining 345-kV lines—i.e., Sammis-Star’s
loading increased steadily above 100% with each
Load-Shed Analysis. The investi-
Cause 1 succeeding 138-kV line lost.
gation team looked at whether it
Inadequate
System would have been possible to pre- Following the loss of the Harding-Chamberlin
Understanding vent the blackout by shedding 345-kVlineat15:05EDT,contingencylimitviola-
load within the Cleveland-Akron tions existed for:
areabeforetheStar-SouthCanton345kVlinetrip-
  The Star-Juniper 345-kV line, whose loadings
ped at 15:41 EDT. The team modeled the system
would exceed emergency limits if the Hanna-
assuming 500 MW of load shed within the Cleve-
Juniper 345-kV line were lost; and
land-Akron area before 15:41 EDT and found that
this would have improved voltage at the Star bus
from 91.7% up to 95.6%, pulling the line loading
Figure 5.12. Cumulative Effects of Sequential
from91to87%ofitsemergencyampererating;an
Outages on Remaining 345-kV Lines
additional 500 MW of load would have had to be
droppedtoimproveStarvoltageto96.6%andthe
line loading to 81% of its emergency ampere rat-
ing. But since the Star-South Canton line had
already been compromised by the tree below it
(which caused the first two trips and reclosures),
and was about to trip from tree contact a third
time, it is not clear that had such load shedding
occurred, it would have prevented the ultimate
trip and lock-out of the line. However, modeling
indicatesthatthisloadshed
would have prevented the Recommendations
subsequent tripping of the 8, page 147; 21, page 158
Sammis-Star line (see page
70).
64  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

  The Hanna-Juniper and Harding-Juniper call at 14:51 EDT, expressing concern that they
345-kV lines, whose loadings would exceed had not seen any indication of an operation, but
emergency limits if the Perry generation unit lackingevidencewithintheircontrolroom,theFE
(1,255 MW) were lost. operators did not pursue the issue.
Operationally, once FE’s system entered an N-1 At15:19EDT,AEPcalledFEbacktoconfirmthat
contingency violation state, any facility loss the Star-South Canton trip had occurred and that
beyond that pushed them farther into violation AEPhadaconfirmedrelayoperationfromthesite.
and into a more unreliable state. After loss of the FE’s operator restated that because they had
Harding-Chamberlinline,toavoidviolatingNERC received no trouble or alarms, they saw no prob-
criteria, FE needed to reduce loading on these lem. An AEP technician at the South Canton sub-
three lines within 30 minutes such that no single station verified the trip. At 15:20 EDT, AEP
contingency would violate an emergency limit; decided to treat the South Canton digital fault
thatis,torestorethesystemtoareliableoperating recorder and relay target information as a “fluke,”
mode. and checked the carrier relays to determine what
the problem might be.31
Phone Calls into the FE Control Room
At15:35EDTtheFEcontrolcenterreceivedacall
Beginning at 14:14 EDT when
Cause 2 from the Mansfield 2 plant operator concerned
Inadequate theirEMSalarmsfailed,anduntil
about generator fault recorder triggers and excita-
Situational at least 15:42 EDT when they
tion voltage spikes with an alarm for
Awareness begantorecognizetheirsituation,
over-excitation, and a dispatcher called reporting
FE operators did not understand
a“bump”ontheirsystem.Soonafterthiscall,FE’s
howmuchoftheirsystemwasbeinglost,anddid
Reading, Pennsylvania control center called
notrealizethedegreetowhichtheirperceptionof
reporting that fault recorders in the Erie west and
their system was in error versus true system con-
southareashadactivated,wonderingifsomething
ditions, despite receiving clues via phone calls
had happened in the Ashtabula-Perry area. The
fromAEP,PJMandMISO,andcustomers.TheFE
Perry nuclear plant operator called to report a
operators were not aware of line outages that
“spike” on the unit’s main transformer. When he
occurred after the trip of Eastlake 5 at 13:31 EDT
wenttolookatthemeteringitwas“stillbouncing
until approximately 15:45 EDT, although they
around pretty good. I’ve got it relay tripped up
were beginning to get external input describing
here . . . so Iknow something ain’t right.” 32
aspects of the system’s weakening condition.
Since FE’s operators were not aware and did not Beginning at this time, the FE operators began to
recognize events as they think that something was wrong, but did not rec-
were occurring, they took Recommendations ognizethatitwasontheirsystem.“It’sgottobein
no actions to return the sys- 19, page 156; 26, page 161 distribution, or something like that, or somebody
tem to a reliable state. else’s problem . . . but I’m not showing any-
thing.”33 Unlike many other transmission grid
AbriefdescriptionfollowsofsomeofthecallsFE
control rooms, FE’s control center did not have a
operators received concerning system problems
map board (which shows schematically all major
andtheirfailuretorecognizethattheproblemwas
lines and plants in the control area on the wall in
on their system. For ease of presentation, this set
front of the operators), which might have shown
of calls extends past the time of the 345-kV line
the location of significant
tripsintothetimecoveredinthenextphase,when Recommendation
line and facility outages
the 138-kV system collapsed. 22, page 159
within the control area.
Following the first trip of the Star-South Canton
At 15:36 EDT, MISO contacted FE regarding the
345-kV line at 14:27 EDT, AEP called FE at 14:32
post-contingency overload on Star-Juniper for the
EDTtodiscussthetripandrecloseoftheline.AEP
loss of the Hanna-Juniper 345-kV line.34
was aware of breaker operations at their end
(SouthCanton)andaskedaboutoperationsatFE’s At15:42EDT,FE’swesterntransmissionoperator
Star end. FE indicated they had seen nothing at informed FE’s IT staff that the EMS system func-
their end of the line, but AEP reiterated that the tionalitywascompromised.“Nothingseemstobe
tripoccurredat14:27EDTandthattheSouthCan- updatingonthecomputers....We’vehadpeople
ton breakers had reclosed successfully.30 There callingandreportingtripsandnothingseemstobe
was an internal FE conversation about the AEP updating in the event summary . . . Ithink we’ve
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  65

gotsomethingseriouslysick.”Thisisthefirstevi- Emergency Action
dencethatamemberofFE’scontrolroomstaffrec-
ForFirstEnergy,aswithmanyutilities,emergency
ognizedanyaspectoftheirdegradedEMSsystem.
awareness is often focused on energy shortages.
Thereisnoindicationthatheinformedanyofthe
Utilities have plans to reduce loads under these
other operators at this moment. However, FE’s IT
circumstances to increasingly greater degrees.
staff discussed the subsequent EMS alarm correc-
Toolsincludecallingforcontractedcustomerload
tive action with some control room staff shortly
reductions, then public appeals, voltage reduc-
thereafter.
tions,andfinallysheddingsystemloadbycutting
Alsoat15:42EDT,thePerryplantoperatorcalled offinterruptibleandfirmcustomers.FEhasaplan
back with more evidence of problems. “I’m still forthisthatisupdatedyearly.Whiletheycantrip
getting a lot of voltage spikes and swings on the loads quickly where there is SCADA control of
generator . . . . I don’tknow how much longer loadbreakers(althoughFEhasfewofthese),from
we’re going to survive.”35 an energy point of view, the intent is to be able to
regularly rotate what loads are not being served,
At 15:45 EDT, the tree trimming crew reported
whichrequirescallingpersonnelouttoswitchthe
thattheyhadwitnessedatree-causedfaultonthe
various groupings in and out. This event was not,
Eastlake-Juniper 345-kV line; however, the actual
however, a capacity or energy emergency or sys-
faultwasontheHanna-Juniper345-kVlineinthe
teminstability,butanemergencyduetotransmis-
samevicinity.Thisinformationaddedtothecon-
sion line overloads.
fusion in the FE control room, because the opera-
tor had indication of flow on the Eastlake-Juniper
To handle an emergency effectively a dispatcher
line.36
must first identify the emergency situation and
AftertheStar-SouthCanton345-kVlinetrippeda then determine effective action. AEP identified
third time and locked out at 15:41:35 EDT, AEP potentialcontingencyoverloadsat15:36EDTand
calledFEat15:45EDTtodiscussandinformthem called PJM even as Star-South Canton, one of the
that they had additional lines that showed over- AEP/FE lines they were discussing, tripped and
load. FE recognized then that the Star breakers pushed FE’s Sammis-Star 345-kV line to its emer-
had tripped and remained open.37 gency rating. Since they had been focused on the
impact of a Sammis-Star loss overloading Star-
At 15:46 EDT the Perry plant operator called the
SouthCanton,theyrecognizedthataseriousprob-
FE control room a third time to say that the unit
lem had arisen on the system for which they did
wasclosetotrippingoff:“It’snotlookinggood....
not have a ready solution. Later, around 15:50
We ain’t going to be here much longer and you’re
EDT, their conversation reflected emergency con-
going to have a bigger problem.”38
ditions (138-kV lines were tripping and several
At 15:48 EDT, an FE transmission operator sent other lines overloaded) but they still found no
stafftomantheStarsubstation,andthenat15:50 practical way to mitigate
EDT, requested staffing at the regions, beginning these overloads across util- Recommendation
with Beaver, then East Springfield.39 ity and reliability coordina- 20, page 158
tor boundaries.
At 15:48 EDT, PJM called MISO to report the
Star-South Canton trip, but the two reliability
At the control area level, FE
coordinators’ measures of the resulting line flows Cause 2
Inadequate remained unaware of the precari-
on FE’s Sammis-Star 345-kV line did not match,
Situational ous condition its system was in,
causing them to wonder whether the Star-South
Awareness with key lines out of service,
Canton 345-kV line had returned to service.40
degrading voltages, and severe
At 15:56 EDT, because PJM was still concerned overloads on their remaining lines. Transcripts
about the impact of the Star-South Canton trip, showthatFEoperatorswereawareoffallingvolt-
PJM called FE to report that Star-South Canton ages and customer problems after loss of the
had tripped and that PJM thought FE’s Hanna-Juniper 345-kV line (at 15:32 EDT). They
Sammis-Star line was in actual emergency limit called out personnel to staff substations because
overload.41FEcouldnotconfirmthisoverload.FE they did not think they could see them with their
informed PJM that Hanna-Juniper was also out datagatheringtools.Theywerealsotalkingtocus-
service. FE believed that the problems existed tomers.ButthereisnoindicationthatFE’sopera-
beyond their system. “AEP must have lost some tors clearly identified their situation as a possible
major stuff.”42 emergencyuntilaround15:45EDTwhentheshift
66  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

supervisorinformedhismanagerthatitlookedas instructions to adjust generators and trip firm
iftheywerelosingthesystem;eventhen,although loads.AfterthelossoftheStar-SouthCantonline,
FE had grasped that its system was in trouble, it voltages were below limits, and there were severe
neverofficiallydeclaredthatitwasanemergency line overloads. But FE did not follow any of these
condition and that emergency or extraordinary procedures on August 14, because FE did not
action was needed. know for most of that time that its system might
need such treatment.
FE’s internal control room procedures and proto-
cols did not prepare it adequately to identify and What training did the operators and reliability
reacttotheAugust14emergency.Throughoutthe coordinatorshaveforrecognizingandresponding
afternoonofAugust14thereweremanycluesthat toemergencies?FErelieduponon-the-jobexperi-
FEhadlostbothitscriticalmonitoringalarmfunc- ence as training for its operators in handling the
tionality and that its transmission system’s reli- routine business of a normal day, but had never
