ground fault caused by a lightning strike. This disturbance resulted in the loss of 12,350
MW of load and affected over 5 million people in
  Circuit breaker operations at the Buchanan the West. The outage began when high winds
South ring bus isolated the Indian Point No. 3 causedthefailureofa500-kVtransmissiontower.
generatingunitfromanyload,andtheunittrip- The tower fell into a parallel 500-kV line tower,
ped for a rejection of 883 MW of load. and both lines were lost. The failure of these two
  Loss of the ring bus isolated the 345-kV tie to lines mechanically cascaded and caused three
additional towers to fail on each line. When the
Ladentown, which had been importing 427
line conductors fell they contacted two 230-kV
MW, making the cumulative resources lost
linescrossingunderthe500-kVrights-of-way,col-
1,310 MW.
lapsing the 230-kV lines.
  18.5 minutes after the first incident, an addi-
The loss of the 500-kV lines activated a remedial
tional lightning strike caused the loss of two
action scheme to control the separation of the
345-kV lines, which connect Sprain Brook to
interconnection into two pre-engineered islands
BuchananNorthandSprainBrooktoMillwood
and trip generation in the Pacific Northwest in
West. These two 345-kV lines share common
order to minimize customer outages and speed
towers between Millwood West and Sprain
restoration. However, delayed operation of the
Brook. One line (Sprain Brook to Millwood
remedial action scheme components occurred for
West) automatically reclosed and was restored
several reasons, and the interconnection sepa-
toserviceinabout2seconds.Thefailureofthe
rated into four islands.
other line to reclose isolated the last Consoli-
datedEdisoninterconnectiontotheNorthwest. In addition to the mechanical failure of the trans-
mission lines, analysis of this outage cited prob-
  The resulting surge of power from the North-
lems with coordination of protective schemes,
west caused the loss of the Pleasant Valley to
because the generator tripping and separation
MillwoodWestlinebyrelayaction(abentcon-
schemes operated slowly or did not operate as
tact on one of the relays at Millwood West
planned. A communication channel component
caused the improper action).
performed sporadically, resulting in delayed
  23 minutes later, the Leeds to Pleasant Valley transmission of the control signal. The backup
345-kV line sagged into a tree due to overload separation scheme also failed to operate, because
and tripped out. the coordination of relay settings did not antici-
pate the power flows experienced in this severe
  Within a minute, the 345 kV to 138 kV trans-
disturbance.
former at Pleasant Valley overloaded and trip-
In addition, the volume and format in which data
ped off, leaving Consolidated Edison with only
were displayed to operators made it difficult to
three remaining interconnections.
assesstheextentofthedisturbanceandwhatcor-
  Within 3 minutes, the Long Island Lighting Co. rectiveactionshouldbetaken.Timereferencesto
systemoperator,onconcurrenceofthepooldis- events in this disturbance were not tied to a com-
patcher,manuallyopenedtheJamaicatoValley mon standard, making real-time evaluation of the
Stream tie. situation more difficult.
  About7minuteslater,thetap-changingmecha-
July 2-3, 1996: West Coast Blackout
nism failed on the Goethals phase-shifter,
resulting in the loss of the Linden-to-Goethals This disturbance resulted in the loss of 11,850
tie to PJM, which was carrying 1,150 MW to MW of load and affected 2 million people in the
Consolidated Edison. West. Customers were affected in Arizona, Cali-
fornia, Colorado, Idaho, Montana, Nebraska,
  Thetworemainingexternal138-kVtiestoCon-
Nevada, New Mexico, Oregon, South Dakota,
solidated Edison tripped on overload, isolating
Texas, Utah, Washington, and Wyoming in the
the Consolidated Edison system.
United States; Alberta and British Columbia in
  Insufficient generation in the isolated system Canada;andBajaCaliforniaNorteinMexico.Out-
caused the Consolidated Edison island to ages lasted from a few minutes to several hours.
collapse.
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  105

The outage began when a 345-kV transmission the overload and loss of additional transmission
lineinIdahosaggedintoatreeandtrippedout.A lines. General voltage decline in the Northwest
protective relay on a parallel transmission line and the loss of McNary generation due to incor-
also detected the fault and incorrectly tripped a rectlyappliedrelayscausedpoweroscillationson
secondline.Analmostsimultaneouslossofthese theCaliforniatoOregonACintertie.Theintertie’s
lines greatly reduced the ability of the system to protective relays tripped these facilities out and
transmitpowerfromthenearbyJimBridgerplant. caused the Western Interconnection to separate
Other relays tripped two of the four generating intofourislands.Followingthelossofthefirsttwo
units at that plant. With the loss of those two lightly loaded lines, operators were unaware that
units, frequency in the entire Western Intercon- the system was in an insecure state over the next
nectionbegantodecline,andvoltagebegantocol- hour,becausenewoperatingstudieshadnotbeen
lapse in the Boise, Idaho, area, affecting the performedtoidentifyneededsystemadjustments.
California-Oregon AC Intertie transfer limit.
June 25, 1998: Upper Midwest Blackout
For23secondsthesystemremainedinprecarious
balance, until the Mill Creek to Antelope 230-kV Thisdisturbanceresultedinthelossof950MWof
line between Montana and Idaho tripped by zone load and affected 152,000 people in Minnesota,
3 relay, depressing voltage at Summer Lake Sub- Montana, North Dakota, South Dakota, and Wis-
station and causing the intertie to slip out of syn- consin in the United States; and Ontario, Mani-
chronism. Remedial action relays separated the toba,andSaskatchewaninCanada.Outageslasted
system into five pre-engineered islands designed up to 19 hours.
to minimize customer outages and restoration
AlightningstorminMinnesotainitiatedaseriesof
times. Similar conditions and initiating factors
events,causingasystemdisturbancethataffected
werepresentonJuly3;however,asvoltagebegan
theentireMid-ContinentAreaPowerPool(MAPP)
to collapse in the Boise area, the operator shed
Region and the northwestern Ontario Hydro sys-
load manually and contained the disturbance.
temoftheNortheastPowerCoordinatingCouncil.
August 10, 1996: West Coast Blackout A345-kVlinewasstruckbylightningandtripped
out.Underlyinglowervoltagelinesbegantoover-
This disturbance resulted in the loss of over
load and trip out, further weakening the system.
28,000MWofloadandaffected7.5millionpeople
Soon afterward, lightning struck a second 345-kV
in the West. Customers were affected in Arizona,
line,takingitoutofserviceaswell.Followingthe
California, Colorado, Idaho, Montana, Nebraska,
outage of the second 345-kV line, the remaining
Nevada, New Mexico, Oregon, South Dakota,
lower voltage transmission lines in the area
Texas, Utah, Washington, and Wyoming in the
became significantly overloaded, and relays took
United States; Alberta and British Columbia in
them out of service. This cascading removal of
Canada;andBajaCaliforniaNorteinMexico.Out-
lines from service continued until the entire
ages lasted from a few minutes to as long as nine
northern MAPP Region was separated from the
hours.
Eastern Interconnection, forming three islands
Triggered by several major transmission line out- and resulting in the eventual blackout of the
ages,thelossofgenerationfromMcNaryDam,and northwestern Ontario Hydro system.
resulting system oscillations, the Western Inter-
Summer of 1999: Northeast U.S.
connection separated into four electrical islands,
with significant loss of load and generation. Prior Non-outage Disturbances
to the disturbance, the transmission system from
Load in the PJM system on July 6, 1999, was
CanadasouththroughtheNorthwestintoCalifor-
51,600MW(approximately5,000MWabovefore-
niawasheavilyloadedwithnorth-to-southpower
cast).PJMusedallemergencyprocedures(includ-
transfers.TheseflowswereduetohighSouthwest
ing a 5% voltage reduction) except manually
demand caused by hot weather, combined with
trippingload,andimported5,000MWfromexter-
excellent hydroelectric conditions in Canada and
nalsystemstoservetherecordcustomerdemand.
the Northwest.
LoadonJuly19,1999,exceeded50,500MW.PJM
Very high temperatures in the Northwest caused loaded all available eastern PJM generation and
two lightly loaded transmission lines to sag into again implemented emergency operating proce-
untrimmed trees and trip out. A third heavily dures from approximately 12 noon into the eve-
loadedlinealsosaggedintoatree.Itsoutageledto ning on both days.
106  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

During these record peak loads, steep voltage pumping, accompanies hot weather and places
declines were experienced on the bulk transmis- higher burdens on transmission lines. Losing cir-
sion system. In each case, a voltage collapse was cuits contributes to voltage decline. Inductive
barely averted through the use of emergency pro- load is unforgiving when voltage declines, draw-
cedures. Low voltage occurred because reactive ing additional reactive supply from the system
demand exceeded reactive supply. High reactive and further contributing to voltage problems.
demand was due to high electricity demand and
Recommendations from previous investigations
highlossesresultingfromhightransfersacrossthe
include:
system. Reactive supply was inadequate because
generators were unavailable or unable to meet   Paying special attention to the condition of
rated reactive capability due to ambient condi- rights-of-way following favorable growing sea-
tions,andbecausesomeshuntcapacitorswereout sons. Very wet and warm spring and summer
of service. growing conditions preceded the 1996 outages
in the West.
Common or Similar Factors   Careful review of any reduction in operations
Among Major Outages andmaintenanceexpensesthatmaycontribute
to decreased frequency of line patrols or trim-
The factors that were common to some of the ming. Maintenance in this area should be
major outages above and the August 14 blackout stronglydirectedtowardpreventiveratherthan
include:(1)conductorcontactwithtrees;(2)over- remedial maintenance.
estimation of dynamic reactive output of system
generators; (3) inability of system operators or Dynamic Reactive Output of Generators
coordinators to visualize events on the entire sys-
Reactive supply is an important ingredient in
tem; (4) failure to ensure that system operation
maintaining healthy power system voltages and
waswithinsafelimits;(5)lackofcoordinationon
facilitating power transfers. Inadequate reactive
systemprotection;(6)ineffectivecommunication;
supply was a factor in most of the events. Shunt
(7) lack of “safety nets;” and (8) inadequate train-
capacitors and generating resources are the most
ingofoperatingpersonnel.Thefollowingsections
significant suppliers of reactive power. Operators
describethenatureofthesefactorsandlistrecom-
perform contingency analysis based on how
mendations from previous investigations that are
power system elements will perform under vari-
relevant to each.
ouspowersystemconditions.Theydetermineand
set transfer limits based on these analyses. Shunt
Conductor Contact With Trees
capacitors are easy to model because they are
This factor was an initiating trigger in several of static. Modeling the dynamic reactive output of
theoutagesandacontributingfactorinthesever- generators under stressed system conditions has
ity of several more. Unlike lightning strikes, for proven to be more challenging. If the model is
which system operators have fair storm-tracking incorrect, estimated transfer limits will also be
tools, system operators generally do not have incorrect.
direct knowledge that a line has contacted a tree
Inmostoftheevents,theassumedcontributionof
and faulted. They will sometimes test the line by
dynamicreactiveoutputofsystemgeneratorswas
tryingtorestoreittoservice,ifthatisdeemedtobe
greater than the generators actually produced,
a safe operation. Even if it does go back into ser-
resulting in more significant voltage problems.
vice, the line may fault and trip out again as load
Some generators were limited in the amount of
heats it up. This is most likely to happen when
reactive power they produced by over-excitation
vegetation has not been adequately managed, in
limits, or necessarily derated because of high
combination with hot and windless conditions.
ambienttemperatures.Othergeneratorswerecon-
Insomeofthedisturbances,treecontactaccount- trolledtoafixedpowerfactoranddidnotcontrib-
edforthelossofmorethanonecircuit,contribut- ute reactive supply in depressed voltage
ing multiple contingencies to the weakening of conditions. Under-voltage load shedding is em-
the system. Lines usually sag into right-of-way ployed as an automatic remedial action in some
obstructionswhentheneedtoretaintransmission interconnections to prevent cascading, and could
interconnection is high. High inductive load be used more widely.
composition,suchasairconditioningorirrigation
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  107

Recommendations from previous investigations presentedtooperatorsorcoordinatorsasinforma-
concerning voltage support and reactive power tiontheycanuseinmakingappropriateoperating
management include: decisions.
  Communicate changes to generator reactive Recommendations from previous investigations
capability limits in a timely and accurate man- concerning visibility and tools include:
nerforbothplanningandoperationalmodeling
  Developcommunicationssystemsanddisplays
purposes.
that give operators immediate information on
  Investigate the development of a generator changes in the status of major components in
MVAr/voltage monitoring process to determine their own and neighboring systems.
whengeneratorsmaynotbefollowingreported
  Supply communications systems with uninter-
MVAr limits.
ruptible power, so that information on system
  Establish a common standard for generator conditions can be transmitted correctly to con-
steady-state and post-contingency (15-minute) trol centers during system disturbances.
MVArcapabilitydefinition;determinemethod-   Inthecontrolcenter,useadynamiclineloading
ology, testing, and operational reporting
and outage display board to provide operating
requirements.
personnelwithrapidandcomprehensiveinfor-
  Determine the generator service level agree- mation about the facilities available and the
operating condition of each facility in service.
mentthatdefinesgeneratorMVArobligationto
help ensure reliable operations.   Givecontrolcentersthecapabilitytodisplayto
  Periodically review and field test the reactive system operators computer-generated alterna-
tiveactionsspecifictotheimmediatesituation,
limits of generators to ensure that reported
together with expected results of each action.
MVAr limits are attainable.
  Establishon-linesecurityanalysiscapabilityto
  Provide operators with on-line indications of
identifythosenextandmultiplefacilityoutages
available reactive capability from each generat-
thatwouldbecriticaltosystemreliabilityfrom
ing unit or groups of generators, other VAr
thermal,stability,andpost-contingencyvoltage
sources, and the reactive margin at all critical
points of view.
buses. This information should assist in the
operating practice of maximizing the use of   Establishtime-synchronizeddisturbancemoni-
shunt capacitors during heavy transfers and toring to help evaluate the performance of the
thereby increase the availability of system interconnectedsystemunderstress,anddesign
dynamic reactive reserve. appropriate controls to protect it.
  For voltage instability problems, consider fast
System Operation Within Safe Limits
automatic capacitor insertion (both series and
shunt), direct shunt reactor and load tripping, Operatorsinseveraloftheeventswereunawareof
and under-voltage load shedding. thevulnerabilityofthesystemtothenextcontin-
gency.Thereasonswerevaried:inaccuratemodel-
  Developandperiodicallyreviewareactivemar-
ing for simulation, no visibility of the loss of key
gin against which system performance should
transmission elements, no operator monitoring of
be evaluated and used to establish maximum
