above a voltage level of 115 kV.
tionsleadingtosimultaneouscomponentoutages.
Bus: Shortened from the word busbar, meaning a
Control Area Operator: An individual or organi-
node in an electrical network where one or more
zation responsible for controlling generation to
elements are connected together.
maintaininterchangeschedulewithothercontrol
CapacitorBank:Acapacitorisanelectricaldevice areasandcontributingtothefrequencyregulation
that provides reactive power to the system and is of the interconnection. The control area is an
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  213

electric system that is bounded by interconnec- owned (by a federal agency, crown corporation,
tion metering and telemetry. State, provincial government, municipal govern-
ment, and public power district).
Current(Electric):Therateofflowofelectronsin
an electrical conductor measured in Amperes. Element: Any electric device with terminals that
may be connected to other electric devices, such
Curtailability: The right of a transmission pro-
as a generator, transformer, circuit, circuit
vidertointerruptallorpartofatransmissionser-
breaker, or bus section.
vice due to constraints that reduce the capability
ofthetransmissionnetworktoprovidethattrans- EnergyEmergency:Aconditionwhenasystemor
missionservice.Transmissionserviceistobecur- power pool does not have adequate energy
tailed only in cases where system reliability is resources(includingwaterforhydrounits)tosup-
threatened or emergency conditions exist. ply its customers’ expected energy requirements.
Demand: The rate at which electric energy is Emergency: Any abnormal system condition that
deliveredtoconsumersorbyasystemorpartofa requiresautomaticorimmediatemanualactionto
system, generally expressed in kilowatts or mega- prevent or limit loss of transmission facilities or
watts,atagiveninstantoraveragedoveranydes- generation supply that could adversely affect the
ignated interval of time. Also see “Load.” reliability of the electric system.
DC:Directcurrent;currentthatissteadyanddoes Emergency Voltage Limits: The operating voltage
not change sinusoidally with time (see “AC”). range on the interconnected systems that is
acceptable for the time, sufficient for system
Dispatch Operator: Control of an integrated elec-
adjustmentstobemadefollowingafacilityoutage
tric system involving operations such as assign-
or system disturbance.
ment of levels of output to specific generating
stations and other sources of supply; control of EMS: An energy management system is a com-
transmission lines, substations, and equipment; puter control system used by electric utility dis-
operationofprincipalintertiesandswitching;and patchers to monitor the real time performance of
scheduling of energy transactions. variouselementsofanelectricsystemandtocon-
trol generation and transmission facilities.
Distribution: For electricity, the function of dis-
tributingelectricpowerusinglowvoltagelinesto Fault: A fault usually means a short circuit, but
retail customers. more generally it refers to some abnormal system
condition. Faults are often random events.
Distribution Network: The portion of an electric
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC):
system that is dedicated to delivering electric
Independent Federal agency that, among other
energytoanenduser,atorbelow69kV.Thedis-
responsibilities, regulates the transmission and
tribution network consists primarily of low-
wholesale sales of electricity in interstate
voltage lines and transformers that “transport”
commerce.
electricity from the bulk power system to retail
customers. Flashover: A plasma arc initiated by some event
suchaslightning.Itseffectisashortcircuitonthe
Disturbance: An unplanned event that produces
network.
an abnormal system condition.
Flowgate: A single or group of transmission ele-
Electrical Energy: The generation or use of elec-
mentsintendedtomodelMWflowimpactrelating
tric power by a device over a period of time,
to transmission limitations and transmission ser-
expressed in kilowatthours (kWh), megawatt-
vice usage.
hours (MWh), or gigawatthours (GWh).
Forced Outage: The removal from service avail-
Electric Utility: Person, agency, authority, or
ability of a generating unit, transmission line, or
other legal entity or instrumentality that owns or
otherfacilityforemergencyreasonsoracondition
operates facilities for the generation, transmis-
in which the equipment is unavailable due to
sion, distribution, or sale of electric energy pri-
unanticipated failure.
marily for use by the public, and is defined as a
utility under the statutes and rules by which it is Frequency: The number of complete alternations
regulated. An electric utility can be investor- or cycles per second of an alternating current,
owned, cooperatively owned, or government- measuredinHertz.Thestandardfrequencyinthe
214  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

UnitedStatesis60Hz.Insomeothercountriesthe usually not-for-profit and can advise utilities
standard is 50 Hz. withinitsterritoryontransmissionexpansionand
maintenance but does not have the responsibility
Frequency Deviation or Error: A departure from
to carry out the functions.
scheduled frequency; the difference between
actual system frequency and the scheduled sys- Interchange: Electric power or energy that flows
tem frequency. across tie-lines from one entity to another,
whether scheduled or inadvertent.
Frequency Regulation: The ability of a Control
Area to assist the interconnected system in main- Interconnected System: A system consisting of
taining scheduled frequency. This assistance can two or more individual electric systems that nor-
includebothturbinegovernorresponseandauto- mally operate in synchronism and have connect-
matic generation control. ing tie lines.
Frequency Swings: Constant changes in fre- Interconnection:Whencapitalized,anyoneofthe
quency from its nominal or steady-state value. five major electric system networks in North
America: Eastern, Western, ERCOT (Texas), Qué-
Generation (Electricity): The process of produc-
bec, and Alaska. When not capitalized, the facili-
ing electrical energy from other forms of energy;
ties that connect two systems or Control Areas.
also,theamountofelectricenergyproduced,usu-
Additionally, an interconnection refers to the
ally expressed in kilowatt hours (kWh) or mega-
facilities that connect a nonutility generator to a
watt hours (MWh).
Control Area or system.
Generator: Generally, an electromechanical
Interface: The specific set of transmission ele-
device used to convert mechanical power to elec-
ments between two areas or between two areas
trical power.
comprising one or more electrical systems.
Grid: An electrical transmission and/or distribu- ISAC: Information Sharing and Analysis Centers
tion network. (ISACs) are designed by the private sector and
serve as a mechanism for gathering, analyzing,
Grid Protection Scheme: Protection equipment
appropriately sanitizing and disseminating pri-
for an electric power system, consisting of circuit
vate sector information. These centers could also
breakers,certainequipmentformeasuringelectri-
gather,analyze,anddisseminateinformationfrom
cal quantities (e.g., current and voltage sensors)
Governmentforfurtherdistributiontotheprivate
anddevicescalledrelays.Eachrelayisdesignedto
sector.ISACsalsoareexpectedtoshareimportant
protect the piece of equipment it has been
information about vulnerabilities, threats, intru-
assigned from damage. The basic philosophy in
sions, and anomalies, but do not interfere with
protection system design is that any equipment
direct information exchanges between companies
that is threatened with damage by a sustained
and the Government.
fault is to be automatically taken out of service.
Island: A portion of a power system or several
Ground: A conducting connection between an
power systems that is electrically separated from
electricalcircuitordeviceandtheearth.Aground
the interconnection due to the disconnection of
may be intentional, as in the case of a safety
transmission system elements.
ground, or accidental, which may result in high
overcurrents. Kilovar (kVAr): Unit of alternating current reac-
tive power equal to 1,000 VArs.
Imbalance:Aconditionwherethegenerationand
interchange schedules do not match demand. Kilovolt (kV): Unit of electrical potential equal to
1,000 Volts.
Impedance: The total effects of a circuit that
oppose the flow of an alternating current consist- Kilovolt-Amperes (kVA): Unit of apparent power
ing of inductance, capacitance, and resistance. It equalto1,000voltamperes.Here,apparentpower
can be quantified in the units of ohms. is in contrast to real power. On AC systems the
voltageandcurrentwillnotbeinphaseifreactive
Independent System Operator (ISO): An organi-
power is being transmitted.
zationresponsibleforthereliableoperationofthe
power grid under its purview and for providing Kilowatthour (kWh): Unit of energy equaling one
open transmission access to all market partici- thousand watthours, or one kilowatt used over
pants on a nondiscriminatory basis. An ISO is one hour. This is the normal quantity used for
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  215

metering and billing electricity customers. The capable of handling additional applications
retailpriceforakWhvariesfromapproximately4 between participants.
centsto15cents.Ata100%conversionefficiency,
Normal (Precontingency) Operating Procedures:
one kWh is equivalent to about 4 fluid ounces of
Operating procedures that are normally invoked
gasoline, 3/16 pound of liquid petroleum, 3 cubic
by the system operator to alleviate potential facil-
feet of natural gas, or 1/4 pound of coal.
ity overloads or other potential system problems
Line Trip: Refers to the automatic opening of the in anticipation of a contingency.
conducting path provided by a transmission line
Normal Voltage Limits: The operating voltage
by the circuit breakers. These openings or “trips”
range on the interconnected systems that is
aretoprotectthetransmissionlineduringfaulted
acceptable on a sustained basis.
conditions.
North American Electric Reliability Council
Load (Electric): The amount of electric power
(NERC): A not-for-profit company formed by the
delivered or required at any specific point or
electric utility industry in 1968 to promote the
points on a system. The requirement originates at
reliabilityoftheelectricitysupplyinNorthAmer-
the energy-consuming equipment of the consum-
ica. NERC consists of nine Regional Reliability
ers. See “Demand.”
Councils and one Affiliate, whose members
Load Shedding: The process of deliberately accountforvirtuallyalltheelectricitysuppliedin
removing (either manually or automatically) pre- the United States, Canada, and a portion of Baja
selectedcustomerdemandfromapowersystemin California Norte, Mexico. The members of these
response to an abnormal condition, to maintain Councils are from all segments of the electricity
the integrity of the system and minimize overall supply industry: investor-owned, federal, rural
customer outages. electric cooperative, state/municipal, and provin-
cial utilities, independent power producers, and
Lockout: A state of a transmission line following
power marketers. The NERC Regions are: East
breaker operations where the condition detected
Central Area Reliability Coordination Agreement
by the protective relaying was not eliminated by
(ECAR); Electric Reliability Council of Texas
temporarilyopeningandreclosingtheline,possi-
(ERCOT); Mid-Atlantic Area Council (MAAC);
blyseveraltimes.Inthisstate,thecircuitbreakers
Mid-America Interconnected Network (MAIN);
cannot generally be reclosed without resetting a
Mid-Continent Area Power Pool (MAPP); North-
lockout device.
east Power Coordinating Council (NPCC); South-
MarketParticipant:Anentityparticipatinginthe eastern Electric Reliability Council (SERC);
energy marketplace by buying/selling transmis- Southwest Power Pool (SPP); Western Systems
sion rights, energy, or ancillary services into, out Coordinating Council (WSCC); and Alaskan Sys-
of, or through an ISO-controlled grid. tems Coordination Council (ASCC, Affiliate).
Megawatthour (MWh): One million watthours. OASIS:OpenAccessSameTimeInformationSer-
vice (OASIS), developed by the Electric Power
Metered Value: A measured electrical quantity
Research Institute, is designed to facilitate open
thatmaybeobservedthroughtelemetering,super-
access by providing users with access to informa-
visory control and data acquisition (SCADA), or
tion on transmission services and availability,
other means.
plus facilities for transactions.
Metering: The methods of applying devices that
Operating Criteria: The fundamental principles
measure and register the amount and direction of
of reliable interconnected systems operation,
electrical quantities with respect to time.
adopted by NERC.
NERC Interregional Security Network (ISN): A
OperatingGuides:OperatingpracticesthataCon-
communications network used to exchange elec-
trol Area or systems functioning as part of a Con-
tricsystemoperatingparametersinnearrealtime
trolAreamaywishtoconsider.Theapplicationof
amongthoseresponsibleforreliableoperationsof
Guides is optional and may vary among Control
the electric system. The ISN provides timely and
Areas to accommodate local conditions and indi-
accurate data and information exchange among
vidual system requirements.
reliability coordinators and other system opera-
tors.TheISN,whichoperatesovertheframerelay Operating Policies: The doctrine developed for
NERCnet system, is a private Intranet that is interconnected systems operation. This doctrine
216  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

consists of Criteria, Standards, Requirements, subgroups, and the Regional Councils to achieve
Guides, and instructions, which apply to all Con- bulk electric system reliability.
trol Areas.
Post-contingency Operating Procedures: Oper-
OperatingProcedures:Asetofpolicies,practices, ating procedures that may be invoked by the sys-
or system adjustments that may be automatically tem operator to mitigate or alleviate system
or manually implemented by the system operator problems after a contingency has occurred.
within a specified time frame to maintain the
Protective Relay: A device designed to detect
operationalintegrityoftheinterconnectedelectric
abnormal system conditions, such as electrical
systems.
shorts on the electric system or within generating
OperatingRequirements:ObligationsofaControl plants, and initiate the operation of circuit break-
Area and systems functioning as part of a Control ers or other control equipment.
Area.
Power/Phase Angle: The angular relationship
Operating Security Limit: The value of a system between an AC (sinusoidal) voltage across a cir-
operating parameter (e.g. total power transfer cuit element and the AC (sinusoidal) current
acrossaninterface)thatsatisfiesthemostlimiting throughit.Therealpowerthatcanflowisrelated
ofprescribedpre-andpost-contingencyoperating to this angle.
criteriaasdeterminedbyequipmentloadingcapa-
Power: See “Real Power.”
bility and acceptable stability and voltage condi-
tions. It is the operating limit to be observed so Power Flow: See “Current.”
that the transmission system will remain reliable
Rate: The authorized charges per unite or level of
even if the worst contingency occurs.
consumptionforaspecifiedtimeperiodforanyof
OperatingStandards:TheobligationsofaControl the classes of utility services provided to a
Area and systems functioning as part of a Control customer.
Area that are measurable. An Operating Standard
Rating: The operational limits of an electric sys-
