2001, 2002, and 2003.23 page3.
58  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

trimmingalongmanyFEtransmissionlines.Notes 3A) FE’s Harding-Chamberlin 345-kV Line
from fly-overs in the spring of 2003 found fewer Tripped: 15:05 EDT
problems, suggesting that fly-overs do not allow At 15:05:41 EDT, FE’s Harding-Chamberlin line
effective identification of the distance between a (Figure5.8)trippedandlockedoutwhileloadedat
tree and the line above it, 44% of its normal and emergency rating. At this
and need to be supple- Recommendations low loading, the line temperature would not
16, page 154; 27, page 162
mentedwithgroundpatrols. exceed safe levels—even if still air meant there
Utility Vegetation Management: When Trees and Lines Contact
Vegetation management is critical to any utility in these transmission rights-of-way, including:
company that maintains overhead energized “therighttoerect,inspect,operate,replace,relo-
lines. It is important and relevant to the August cate, repair, patrol and permanently maintain
14 events because electric power outages occur upon,over,underandalongtheabovedescribed
when trees, or portions of trees, grow up or fall right of way across said premises all necessary
into overhead electric power lines. While not all structures,wires,cablesandotherusualfixtures
outages can be prevented (due to storms, heavy and appurtenances used for or in connection
winds, etc.), some outages can be mitigated or withthetransmissionanddistributionofelectric
prevented by managing the vegetation before it current, including telephone and telegraph, and
becomes a problem. When a tree contacts a the right to trim, cut, remove or control by any
powerlineitcausesashortcircuit,whichisread othermeansatanyandalltimessuchtrees,limbs
bytheline’srelaysasagroundfault.Directphys- and underbrush within or adjacent to said right
icalcontactisnotnecessaryforashortcircuitto of way as may interfere with or endanger said
occur.Anelectricarccanoccurbetweenapartof structures,wiresorappurtenances,ortheiroper-
a tree and a nearby high-voltage conductor if a ations.”a
sufficient distance separating them is not main-
FEusesa5-yearcyclefortransmissionlinevege-
tained. Arcing distances vary based on such fac-
tationmaintenance(i.e.,itcompletesallrequired
tors such as voltage and ambient wind and
vegetationworkwithina5-yearperiodforallcir-
temperature conditions. Arcs can cause fires as
cuits). A 5-year cycle is consistent with industry
well as short circuits and line outages.
practices,anditiscommonfortransmissionpro-
Most utilities have right-of-way and easement viders not to fully exercise their easement rights
agreements allowing them to clear and maintain on transmission rights-of-way due to landowner
vegetationasneededalongtheirlinestoprovide or land manager opposition.
safe and reliable electric power. Transmission
easements generally give the utility a great deal A detailed study prepared for this investigation,
of control over the landscape, with extensive “Utility Vegetation Management Final Report,”
rights to do whatever work is required to main- concludesthatalthoughFirstEnergy’svegetation
tain the lines with adequate clearance through management practices are within common or
the control of vegetation. The three principal averageindustrypractices,thosecommonindus-
means of managing vegetation along a transmis- try practices need significant improvement to
sion right-of-way are pruning the limbs adjacent assure greater transmission reliability.b The
to the line clearance zone, removing vegetation report further recommends that strict regulatory
completelybymowingorcutting,andusingher- oversight and support will be required for utili-
bicidestoretardorkillfurthergrowth.Itiscom- ties to improve and sustain needed improve-
mon to see more tree and brush removal using mentsintheirvegetationmanagementprograms.
mechanical and chemical tools and relatively
NERChasnostandardsorrequirementsforvege-
less pruning along transmission rights-of-way.
tation management or transmission right-of-way
FE’s easement agreements establish extensive clearances, nor for the determination of line
rights regarding what can be pruned or removed ratings.
aStandardlanguageinFE’sright-of-wayeasementagreement.
b“UtilityVegetationManagementFinalReport,”CNUtilityConsulting,March2004.
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  59

was no wind cooling of the con- Figure 5.8. Harding-Chamberlin 345-kV Line
Cause 3
ductor—and the line would not
Inadequate
Tree sagexcessively.Theinvestigation
Trimming team examined the relay data for
this trip, identified the geo-
graphic location of the fault, and determined that
the relay data match the classic “signature” pat-
tern for a tree/line short circuit to ground fault.
The field team found the remains of trees and
brush at the fault location determined from the
relaydata.Atthislocation,conductorheightmea-
sured 46 feet 7 inches (14.20 meters), while the
height of the felled tree measured 42 feet (12.80
meters); however, portions of the tree had been
removedfromthesite.Thismeansthatwhileitis
difficult to determine the exact height of the line
contact, the measured height is a minimum and SCADAinputoftheline’sstatuschange,thiswas
the actual contact was likely 3 to 4 feet (0.9 to 1.2 presented to MISO operators as breaker status
meters) higher than estimated here. Burn marks changes rather than a line failure. Because their
were observed 35 feet 8 inches (10.87 meters) up EMS system topology processor had not yet been
the tree, and the crown of this tree was at least 6 linkedtorecognizelinefailures,itdidnotconnect
feet (1.83 meters) taller than the observed burn the breaker information to the loss of a transmis-
marks.Thetreeshowedevi- sion line. Thus, MISO’s operators did not recog-
dence of fault current dam- Recommendations nize the Harding-Chamberlin trip as a significant
16, page 154; 27, page 162
age.24 contingencyeventandcouldnotadviseFEregard-
ing the event or its consequences. Further, with-
When the Harding-Chamberlin line locked out,
out its state estimator and associated contingency
the loss of this 345-kV path caused the remaining
analyses, MISO was unable to identify potential
threesouthern345-kVlinesintoClevelandtopick
overloads that would occur due to various line or
up more load, with Hanna-Juniper picking up
equipment outages. Accordingly, when the Har-
the most. The Harding-Chamberlin outage also
ding-Chamberlin 345-kV line tripped at 15:05
caused more power to flow through the underly-
EDT, the state estimator did not produce results
ing 138-kV system.
and could not predict an
Cause 2 MISO did not discover that Har- overload if the Hanna- Recommendation
Inadequate ding-Chamberlin had tripped Juniper 345-kV line were to 30, page 163
Situational until after the blackout, when fail.
Awareness MISO reviewed the breaker oper-
ation log that evening. FE indi- 3C) FE’s Hanna-Juniper 345-kV Line Tripped:
cates that it discovered the line was out while 15:32 EDT
investigating system conditions in response to
At 15:32:03 EDT the Hanna-
MISO’s call at 15:36 EDT, when MISO told FE Cause 3
Inadequate Juniper line (Figure 5.9) tripped
that MISO’s flowgate monitoring tool showed
Tree and locked out. A tree-trimming
a Star-Juniper line overload following a contin-
Trimming crew was working nearby and
gency loss of Hanna-Juniper;25 however, the
observed the tree/line contact.
investigation team has found no evidence within
The tree contact occurred on the south phase,
the control room logs or transcripts to show that
which is lower than the center phase due to
FE knew of the Harding-
construction design. Although little evidence
Chamberlin line failure Recommendation
22, page 159 remainedofthetreeduringthefieldteam’svisitin
until after the blackout.
October,theteamobservedatreestump14inches
Harding-Chamberlin was not one (35.5cm)indiameteratitsgroundlineandtalked
Cause 4
Inadequate of the flowgates that MISO moni- to an individual who witnessed the contact on
RC Diagnostic tored as a key transmission loca- August14.26Photographsclearlyindicatethatthe
Support tion,sothereliabilitycoordinator tree was of excessive height (Figure 5.10). Sur-
was unaware when FE’s first roundingtreeswere18inches(45.7cm)indiame-
345-kV line failed. Although MISO received ter at ground line and 60 feet (18.3 meters) in
60  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

height(notnearlines).Othersitesatthislocation Figure 5.9. Hanna-Juniper 345-kV Line
had numerous (at least 20) trees in this right-
of-way.
Hanna-Juniper was loaded at 88% of its normal
and emergency rating when it tripped. With this
line open, over 1,200 MVA of power flow had to
find a new path to reach its load in Cleveland.
Loading on the remaining two 345-kV lines
increased,withStar-Junipertakingthebulkofthe
power. This caused Star-South Canton’s loading
to rise above its normal but within its emergency
rating and pushed more power onto the 138-kV
system. Flows west into Michigan decreased
slightly and voltages declined somewhat in the
Cleveland area.
Why Did So Many Tree-to-Line Contacts Happen on August 14?
Tree-to-line contacts and resulting transmission   Astemperaturesincrease,ambientairtemper-
outages are not unusual in the summer across atures provide less cooling for loaded trans-
much of North America. The phenomenon mission lines.
occursbecauseofacombinationofeventsoccur-
  Windflowscooltransmissionlinesbyincreas-
ring particularly in late summer:
ing the airflow of moving air across the line.
  Mosttreegrowthoccursduringthespringand On August 14 wind speeds at the Ohio
summer months, so the later in the summer Akron-Fulton airport averaged 5 knots (1.5
the taller the tree and the greater its potential m/sec)ataround14:00EDT,butby15:00EDT
to contact a nearby transmission line. windspeedshadfallento2knots(0.6m/sec)—
the wind speed commonly assumed in con-
  Astemperaturesincrease,customersusemore
ductor design—or lower. With lower winds,
air conditioning and load levels increase.
the lines sagged further and closer to any tree
Higherloadlevelsincreaseflowsonthetrans-
limbs near the lines.
mission system, causing greater demands for
both active power (MW) and reactive power This combination of events on August 14 across
(MVAr). Higher flow on a transmission line much of Ohio and Indiana caused transmission
causesthelinetoheatup,andthehotlinesags lines to heat and sag. If a tree had grown into a
lower because the hot conductor metal power line’s designed clearance area, then a
expands. Most emergency line ratings are set tree/line contact was more likely, though not
to limit conductors’ internal temperatures to inevitable.Anoutageononelinewouldincrease
no more than 100°C (212°F). power flows on related lines, causing them to be
loaded higher, heat further, and sag lower.
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  61

3D) AEP and PJM Begin Arranging a TLR for developinga350MWTLRtomitigateit.TheTLR
Star-South Canton: 15:35 EDT was to relieve the actual overload above normal
rating then occurring on Star-South Canton, and
Because its alarm system was not
Cause 4 prevent an overload above emergency rating on
Inadequate working, FE was not aware of the
RC Diagnostic Harding-Chamberlin or Hanna-
Support Juniper line trips. However, once Figure 5.10. Cause of the Hanna-Juniper Line Loss
MISOmanuallyupdatedthestate
estimatormodelfortheStuart-Atlanta345-kVline
outage, the software successfully completed a
stateestimationandcontingencyanalysisat15:41
EDT. But this left a 36 minute period, from 15:05
EDT to 15:41 EDT, during which MISO did not
recognize the consequences of the Hanna-Juniper
loss, and FE operators knew neither of the line’s
loss nor its consequences. PJM and AEP recog-
nizedtheoverloadonStar-SouthCanton,buthad
not expected it because their earlier contingency
analysis did not examine enough lines within the
FE system to foresee this result of the Hanna-
Juniper contingency on top of the Harding-
Chamberlin outage. ThisAugust14photoshowsthetreethatcausedthelossof
the Hanna-Juniper line (tallest tree in photo). Other 345-kV
AfterAEPrecognizedtheStar-SouthCantonover-
conductors and shield wires can be seen in the background.
load, at 15:35 EDT AEP asked PJM to begin Photo by Nelson Tree.
Handling Emergencies by Shedding Load and Arranging TLRs
Transmission loading problems. Problems such redispatchand/orload-sheddingunderTLRlevel
as contingent overloads of normal ratings are 6toreturntoasecurestate.Afterasecurestateis
typically handled by arranging Transmission reached, TLR level 3 and/or 5 can be initiated to
Loading Relief (TLR) measures, which in most relieve the emergency generation redispatch or
cases take effect as a schedule change 30 to 60 load-shedding activation.
minutes after they are issued. Apart from a TLR
Systemoperatorsandreliabilitycoordinators,by
level6,TLRsareintendedasatooltopreventthe
NERC policy, have the responsibility and the
system from being operated in an unreliable
authority to take actions up to and including
state,a and are not applicable in real-time emer-
emergency generation redispatch and shedding
gency situations because it takes too long to
firmloadtopreservesystemsecurity.OnAugust
implementreductions.Actualoverloadsandvio-
14, because they either did not know or under-
lations of stability limits need to be handled
stand enough about system conditions at the
immediately under TLR level 4 or 6 by redis-
time,systemoperatorsatFE,MISO,PJM,orAEP
patching generation, system reconfiguration or
did not call for emergency actions.
tripping load. The dispatchers at FE, MISO and
other control areas or reliability coordinators
Use of automatic procedures in voltage-related
haveauthority—andunderNERCoperatingpoli-
emergencies.Therearefewautomaticsafetynets
cies, responsibility—to take such action, but the
in place in northern Ohio except for under-
occasion to do so is relatively rare.
frequency load-shedding in some locations. In
Lesser TLRs reduce scheduled transactions— some utility systems in the U.S. Northeast,
non-firm first, then pro-rata between firm trans- Ontario, and parts of the Western Interconnec-
actions, including flows that serve native load. tion, special protection systems or remedial
When pre-contingent conditions are not solved action schemes, such as under-voltage load-
with TLR levels 3 and 5, or conditions reach shedding are used to shed load under defined
actual overloading or surpass stability limits, severe contingency conditions similar to those
operators must use emergency generation that occurred in northern Ohio on August 14.
a“NorthernMAPP/NorthwesternOntarioDisturbance-June25,1998,”NERC1998DisturbanceReport,page17.
62  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

that line if the Sammis-Star line were to fail. But were not working properly,
whentheybeganworkingontheTLR,neitherAEP MISO’s ability to recognize Recommendations
22, page 159; 30, page 163
nor PJM realized that the Hanna-Juniper 345-kV FE’s evolving contingency
line had already tripped at 15:32 EDT, further situation was impaired.
degrading system conditions. Since the great
3F) Loss of the Star-South Canton 345-kV Line:
majorityofTLRsareforcutsof25to50MW,a350
15:41 EDT
MW TLR request was highly unusual and opera-
tors were attempting to confirm why so much The Star-South Canton line (Figure 5.11) crosses
reliefwassuddenlyrequiredbeforeimplementing the boundary between FE and AEP—each com-
therequestedTLR.Lessthantenminuteselapsed panyownstheportionofthelineandmanagesthe
between the loss of Hanna-Juniper, the overload right-of-way within its respective territory. The
above the normal limits of Star-SouthCantonlinetrippedandreclosedthree
Star-South Canton, and the Recommendations times on the afternoon of August 14, first at
6, page 147; 22, page 159;
Star-South Canton trip and 30, page 163; 31, page 163 14:27:15 EDT while carrying less than 55% of its
lock-out. emergency rating (reclosing at both ends), then at
15:38:48 and again at 15:41:33 EDT. These multi-
Unfortunately, neither AEP nor
Cause 2 ple contacts had the effect of “electric
Inadequate PJM recognized that even a 350
tree-trimming,”burningbackthecontactinglimbs
Situational MW TLR on the Star-South Can-
temporarily and allowing the line to carry more
Awareness ton line would have had little
current until further sag in the still air caused the
impact on the overload. Investi-
final contact and lock-out. At 15:41:35 EDT the
gation team analysis using the Interchange Distri-
linetrippedandlockedoutattheStarsubstation,
bution Calculator (which was fully available on
withpowerflowat93%ofitsemergencyrating.A
