stability measures (reactive reserve monitor,
transfer levels.
powertransferangle),andnoreassessmentofsys-
tem conditions following the loss of an element
System Visibility Procedures and
and readjustment of safe limits.
Operator Tools
Recommendations from previous investigations
Each control area operates as part of a single syn-
include:
chronous interconnection. However, the parties
withvariousgeographicorfunctionalresponsibil-   Following a contingency, the system must be
ities for reliable operation of the grid do not have returned to a reliable state within the allowed
visibilityoftheentiresystem.Eventsinneighbor- readjustment period. Operating guides must be
ing systems may not be visible to an operator or reviewed to ensure that procedures exist to
reliability coordinator, or power system data restore system reliability in the allowable time
may be available in a control center but not be periods.
108  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

  Reduce scheduled transfers to a safe and pru- a specified period of time. The time delay
dentleveluntilstudieshavebeenconductedto shouldbelongenoughtoallowthesystemoper-
determine the maximum simultaneous transfer atortoattempttoreducelineloadingspromptly
capability limits. by other means.
  Reevaluate processes for identifying unusual   Review phase-angle restrictions that can pre-
operating conditions and potential disturbance ventreclosingofmajorinterconnectionsduring
scenarios, and make sure they are studied system emergencies. Consideration should be
beforetheyareencounteredinreal-timeoperat- giventobypassingsynchronism-checkrelaysto
ing conditions. permit direct closing of critical interconnec-
tions when it is necessary to maintain stability
Coordination of System Protection
of the grid during an emergency.
(Transmission and Generation Elements)
  Reviewtheneedforcontrolledislanding.Oper-
Protective relays are designed to detect short cir- ating guides should address the potential for
cuits and act locally to isolate faulted power sys- significant generation/load imbalance within
tem equipment from the system—both to protect the islands.
theequipmentfromdamageandtoprotectthesys-
Effectiveness of Communications
tem from faulty equipment. Relay systems are
applied with redundancy in primary and backup
Under normal conditions, parties with reliability
modes.Ifonerelayfails,anothershoulddetectthe
responsibility need to communicate important
fault and trip appropriate circuit breakers. Some
and prioritized information to each other in a
backup relays have significant “reach,” such that
timely way, to help preserve the integrity of the
non-faultedlineoverloadsorstableswingsmaybe
grid. This is especially important in emergencies.
seenasfaultsandcausethetrippingofalinewhen
During emergencies, operators should be relieved
it is not advantageous to do so. Proper coordina-
of duties unrelated to preserving the grid. A com-
tion of the many relay devices in an intercon-
mon factor in several of the events described
nectedsystemisasignificantchallenge,requiring
above was that information about outages occur-
continual review and revision. Some relays can
ring in one system was not provided to neighbor-
preventresynchronizing,makingrestorationmore
ing systems.
difficult.
Need for Safety Nets
System-wide controls protect the interconnected
operation rather than specific pieces of equip- A safety net is a protective scheme that activates
ment. Examples include controlled islanding to automatically if a pre-specified, significant con-
mitigate the severity of an inevitable disturbance tingency occurs. When activated, such schemes
and under-voltage or under-frequency load shed- involvecertaincostsandinconvenience,butthey
ding.Failuretooperate(ormisoperationof)oneor canpreventsomedisturbancesfromgettingoutof
morerelaysasaneventdevelopedwasacommon control.Theseplansinvolveactionssuchasshed-
factor in several of the disturbances. ding load, dropping generation, or islanding, and
in all cases the intent is to have a controlled out-
Recommendations developed after previous out-
come that is less severe than the likely uncon-
ages include:
trolledoutcome.Ifasafetynethadnotbeentaken
  Performsystemtriptestsofrelayschemesperi- outofserviceintheWestinAugust1996,itwould
odically. At installation the acceptance test havelessenedtheseverityofthedisturbancefrom
should be performed on the complete relay 28,000MWofloadlosttolessthan7,200MW.(It
scheme in addition to each individual compo- has since been returned to service.) Safety nets
nent so that the adequacy of the scheme is shouldnotbereliedupontoestablishtransferlim-
verified. its, however.
  Continually update relay protection to fit Previousrecommendationsconcerningsafetynets
changing system development and to incorpo- include:
rate improved relay control devices.
  Establish and maintain coordinated programs
  Install sensing devices on critical transmission of automatic load shedding in areas not so
linestoshedloadorgenerationautomaticallyif equipped,inordertopreventtotallossofpower
theshort-termemergencyratingisexceededfor in an area that has been separated from the
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  109

main network and is deficient in generation. frames in many cases. Other readjustments
Load shedding should be regarded as an insur- must be used, and the system operator must
anceprogram,however,andshouldnotbeused take responsibility to restore the system
as a substitute for adequate system design. immediately.
  Install load-shedding controls to allow fast sin-   Operators’ authority and responsibility to take
gle-action activation of large-block load shed- immediate action if they sense the system is
ding by an operator. starting to degrade should be emphasized and
protected.
Training of Operating Personnel
  The current processes for assessing the poten-
Operatingprocedureswerenecessarybutnotsuf- tial for voltage instability and the need to
ficient to deal with severe power system distur- enhance the existing operator training pro-
bances in several of the events. Enhanced grams, operational tools, and annual technical
procedures and training for operating personnel assessmentsshouldbereviewedtoimprovethe
were recommended. Dispatcher training facility ability to predict future voltage stability prob-
scenarios with disturbance simulation were sug- lems prior to their occurrence, and to mitigate
gested as well. Operators tended to reduce sched- the potential for adverse effects on a regional
ules for transactions but were reluctant to call scale.
for increased generation—or especially to shed
load—in the face of a disturbance that threatened
Comparisons With the
to bring the whole system down.
August 14 Blackout
Previous recommendations concerning training
include: The blackout on August 14, 2003, had several
  Thorough programs and schedules for operator causesorcontributoryfactorsincommonwiththe
earlier outages, including:
training and retraining should be vigorously
administered.   Inadequate vegetation management
  Afull-scalesimulatorshouldbemadeavailable   Failuretoensureoperationwithinsecurelimits
toprovideoperatingpersonnelwith“hands-on”
  Failure to identify emergency conditions and
experience in dealing with possible emergency
communicate that status to neighboring
or other system conditions.
systems
  Procedures and training programs for system
  Inadequate operator training
operators should include anticipation, recogni-
tion, and definition of emergency situations.   Inadequate regional-scale visibility over the
power system
  Written procedures and training materials
should include criteria that system operators   Inadequate coordination of relays and other
can use to recognize signs of system stress and protective devices or systems.
mitigating measures to be taken before condi-
New causal features of the August 14 blackout
tions degrade into emergencies.
include: inadequate interregional visibility over
  Line loading relief procedures should not be the power system; dysfunction of a control area’s
relied upon when the system is in an insecure SCADA/EMSsystem;andlackofadequatebackup
state, as these procedures cannot be imple- capability to that system.
mented effectively within the required time
110  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

8.
Performance of Nuclear Power Plants
Affected by the Blackout
Introduction contributetoitsspread(i.e.,toanextentbeyond
the normal tripping of the plants at expected
On August 14, 2003, nine U.S. nuclear power conditions).
plants experienced rapid shutdowns (reactor
trips)asaconsequenceofthepoweroutage.Seven   Theseverityofthegridtransientcausedgenera-
nuclear power plants in Canada operating at high tors, turbines, or reactor systems at the nuclear
power levels at the time of the event also experi- plants to reach protective feature limits and
enced rapid shutdowns. Four other Canadian actuate automatic protective actions.
nuclear plants automatically disconnected from
  Thenuclearplantsrespondedtothegridcondi-
the grid due to the electrical transient but were
tions in a manner consistent with the plant
able to continue operating at a reduced power
designs.
level and were available to supply power to the
gridasitwasrestoredbythetransmissionsystem   The nuclear plants were maintained in a safe
operators. Six nuclear plants in the United States condition until conditions were met to permit
andoneinCanadaexperiencedsignificantelectri- the nuclear plants to resume supplying electri-
cal disturbances but were able to continue gener- cal power to the grid.
ating electricity. Many non-nuclear generating
plants in both countries also tripped during the   For nuclear plants in the United States:
event. Numerous other nuclear plants observed
 Fermi2,OysterCreek,andPerrytrippeddue
disturbances on the electrical grid but continued
to main generator trips, which resulted from
to generate electrical power without interruption.
voltage and frequency fluctuations on the
The Nuclear Working Group (NWG) was one of grid. Nine Mile 1 tripped due to a main tur-
three Working Groups created to support the binetripduetofrequencyfluctuationsonthe
U.S.-Canada Power System Outage Task Force. grid.
The NWG was charged with identifying all rele-
 FitzPatrick and Nine Mile 2 tripped due to
vant actions by nuclear generating facilities in
reactor trips, which resulted from turbine
connection with the outage. Nils Diaz, Chairman
controlsystemlowpressureduetofrequency
oftheU.S.NuclearRegulatoryCommission(NRC)
fluctuationsonthegrid.Ginnatrippeddueto
and Linda Keen, President and CEO of the Cana-
areactortripwhichresultedfromalargeloss
dian Nuclear Safety Commission (CNSC) were
of electrical load due to frequency fluctua-
co-chairs of the Working Group, with other mem-
tions on the grid. Indian Point 2 and Indian
bers appointed from industry and various State
Point 3 tripped due to a reactor trip on low
and federal agencies.
flow, which resulted when low grid fre-
In Phase I, the NWG focused on collecting and quency tripped reactor coolant pumps.
analyzing data from each affected nuclear power
plant to determine what happened, and whether   For nuclear plants in Canada:
any activities at the plants caused or contributed
 AtBruceBandPickeringB,frequencyand/or
to the power outage or involved a significant
voltage fluctuations on the grid resulted in
safetyissue.PhaseIculminatedintheissuanceof
the automatic disconnection of generators
the Task Force’s Interim Report, which reported
from the grid. For those units that were suc-
that:
cessful in maintaining the unit generators
  The affected nuclear power plants did not operational,reactorpowerwasautomatically
trigger the power outage or inappropriately reduced.
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  111

 At Darlington, load swing on the grid led to plants that shut down or disconnected from the
the automatic reduction in power of the four grid responded automatically to grid conditions.
reactors. The generators were, in turn, auto- Allthenuclearplantsrespondedinamannercon-
matically disconnected from the grid. sistent with the plant designs. Safety functions
were effectively accomplished, and the nuclear
 ThreereactorsatBruceBandoneatDarling-
plantsthattrippedweremaintainedinasafeshut-
tonwerereturnedto60%power.Thesereac-
down condition until their restart.
tors were available to deliver power to the
grid on the instructions of the transmission InPhaseII,theNWGcollectedcommentsandana-
system operator. lyzed information related to potential recommen-
dations to help prevent future power outages.
 Three units at Darlington were placed in a
Representatives of the NWG, including represen-
zero-power hot state, and four units at
tativesoftheNRCandtheCNSC,attendedpublic
Pickering B and one unit at Bruce B were
meetings to solicit feedback and recommenda-
placed in a Guaranteed Shutdown State.
tions held in Cleveland, Ohio; New York City,
Thelicensees’returntopoweroperationfollowed New York; and Toronto, Ontario, on December 4,
a deliberate process controlled by plant proce- 5,and8,2003,respectively.Representativesofthe
dures and regulations. Equipment and process NWG also participated in the NRC’s public meet-
problems, whether existing prior to or caused by ing to solicit feedback and recommendations on
the event, would normally be addressed prior to the Northeast blackout held in Rockville, Mary-
restart.TheNWGissatisfiedthatlicenseestookan land, on January 6, 2004.
appropriately conservative approach to their
AdditionaldetailsonboththePhaseIandPhaseII
restart activities, placing a priority on safety.
effortsareavailableinthefollowingsections.Due
  For U.S. nuclear plants: Ginna, Indian Point 2, to the major design differences between nuclear
Nine Mile 2, and Oyster Creek resumed electri- plants in Canada and the United States, the NWG
cal generation on August 17. FitzPatrick and decided to have separate sections for each coun-
Nine Mile 1 resumed electrical generation on try. This also responds to the request by the
August 18. Fermi 2 resumed electrical genera- nuclear regulatory agencies in both countries to
tiononAugust20.Perryresumedelectricalgen- havesectionsofthereportthatstandalone,sothat
eration on August 21. Indian Point 3 resumed they can also be used as regulatory documents.
electricalgenerationonAugust22.IndianPoint
3 had equipment issues (failed splices in the
Findings of the U.S. Nuclear
control rod drive mechanism power system)
that required repair prior to restart. Ginna Working Group
submittedaspecialrequestforenforcementdis-
cretion from the NRC to permit mode changes Summary
and restart with an inoperable auxiliary
feedwater pump. The NRC granted the request The U.S. NWG found no evidence that the shut-
for enforcement discretion. down of the nine U.S. nuclear power plants trig-
geredtheoutage,orinappropriatelycontributedto
  ForCanadiannuclearplants:Therestartofthe
its spread (i.e., to an extent beyond the normal
Canadian nuclear plants was carried out in
tripping of the plants at expected conditions). All
accordance with approved Operating Policies
nine plants that experienced a reactor trip were
and Principles. Three units at Bruce B and one
responding to grid conditions. The severity of the
atDarlingtonwereresynchronizedwiththegrid
gridtransientcausedgenerators,turbines,orreac-
within 6 hours of the event. The remaining
tor systems at the plants to reach a protective fea-
three units at Darlington were reconnected by
ture limit and actuate a plant shutdown. All nine
August17and18.Units5,6,and8atPickering
plantstrippedinresponsetothoseconditionsina
B and Unit 6 at Bruce B returned to service
manner consistent with the plant designs. The
between August 22 and August 25.
nine plants automatically shut down in a safe
The NWG has found no evidence that the shut- fashion to protect the plants from the grid tran-
down of the nuclear power plants triggered the sient. Safety functions were effectively accom-
outageorinappropriatelycontributedtoitsspread plished with few problems, and the plants were
(i.e., to an extent beyond the normal tripping of maintained in a safe shutdown condition until
theplantsatexpectedconditions).Allthenuclear their restart.
112  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

