lossofoffsitepower.Offsitepowerwasrestoredto chronized to the national time standard).
116  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

Ginna. Ginna is located 20 miles (32 km) north- reactor protection signal tripped the reactor,
east of Rochester, NY, in northern New York on which resulted in turbine and generator trips.
Lake Ontario. It was generating about 487 MWe
The auxiliary bus experienced the under-
beforetheevent.ThereactortrippedduetoOver-
frequency due to fluctuating grid conditions.
Temperature-Delta-Temperature. This trip signal
Offsite power was lost to all the plant auxiliary
protectsthereactorcorefromexceedingtempera-
buses.Thesafetybuseswerereenergizedfromthe
ture limits. The turbine control valves closed
emergency diesel generators. Decay heat removal
downinresponsetothechanginggridconditions.
systems maintained the cooling function for the
This caused a temperature and pressure transient
reactor fuel.
in the reactor, resulting in an Over-Temperature-
Delta-Temperature trip.
The lowest emergency declaration, an Unusual
Event,wasdeclaredatabout16:25EDTduetothe
Offsite power was not lost to the plant auxiliary
loss of offsite power for more than 15 minutes.
buses. In the operators’ judgement, offsite power
Offsite power was restored to at least one safety
was not stable, so they conservatively energized
busatabout20:02EDTonAugust14.Thefollow-
thesafetybusesfromtheemergencydieselgenera-
ing equipment problems were noted: the service
tors. Decay heat removal systems maintained the
water to one of the emergency diesel generators
coolingfunctionforthereactorfuel.Offsitepower
developed a leak; a steam generator atmospheric
wasnotlost,andstabilizedabout50minutesafter
dump valve did not control steam generator pres-
the reactor trip.
sureinautomaticandhadtobeshiftedtomanual;
The lowest emergency declaration, an Unusual a steam trap associated with the turbine-driven
Event,wasdeclaredatabout16:46EDTduetothe AFW pump failed open, resulting in operators
degraded offsite power. Offsite power was securingtheturbineafter2.5hours;lossofinstru-
restored to at least one safety bus at about 21:08 mentairrequiredoperatorstotakemanualcontrol
EDT on August 14. The following equipment ofchargingandaletdownisolationoccurred;and
problemswerenoted:thedigitalfeedwatercontrol operatorsinthefieldcouldnotuseradios;andthe
systembehavedinanunexpectedmannerfollow- diesel generator for the Unit 2 Technical Support
ingthetrip,resultinginhighsteamgeneratorlev- Center failed to function. Also, several uninter-
els; there was a loss of RCP seal flow indication, ruptible power supplies in the Emergency Opera-
which complicated restarting the pumps; and at tions Facility failed. This reduced the capability
leastoneofthepower-operatedreliefvalvesexpe- forcommunicationsanddatacollection.Alternate
riencedminorleakagefollowingproperoperation equipment was used to maintain vital communi-
and closure during the transient. Also, one of the cations.1 The main generator was reconnected to
motor-driven auxiliary feedwater pumps was the grid at about 12:58 EDT on August 17.
damaged after running with low flow conditions
due to an improper valve alignment. The redun- Indian Point 3. Indian Point 3 is located 24 miles
dant pumps supplied the required water flow. (39 km) north of New York City on the Hudson
River. It was generating about 1,010 MWe before
The NRC issued a Notice of Enforcement Discre-
theevent.Thereactortrippedduetolossofareac-
tiontoallowGinnatoperformmodechangesand
tor coolant pump that tripped because the auxil-
restart the reactor with one auxiliary feedwater
iary bus frequency fluctuations actuated the
(AFW) pump inoperable. Ginna has two AFW
under-frequency relay, which protects against
pumps, one turbine-driven AFW pump, and two
inadequate coolant flow through the reactor core.
standby AFW pumps, all powered from safety-
This reactor protection signal tripped the reactor,
related buses. The main generator was recon-
which resulted in turbine and generator trips.
nected to the grid at about 20:38 EDT on August
17. The auxiliary bus experienced the under-
frequency due to fluctuating grid conditions.
Indian Point 2. Indian Point 2 is located 24 miles
Offsite power was lost to all the plant auxiliary
(39 km) north of New York City on the Hudson
buses.Thesafetybuseswerereenergizedfromthe
River.Itwasgeneratingabout990MWebeforethe
emergency diesel generators. Decay heat removal
event. The reactor tripped due to loss of a reactor
systems maintained the cooling function for the
coolant pump that tripped because the auxiliary
reactor fuel.
bus frequency fluctuations actuated the under-
frequency relay, which protects against inade- The lowest emergency declaration, an Unusual
quate coolant flow through the reactor core. This Event,wasdeclaredatabout16:23EDTduetothe
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  117

loss of offsite power for more than 15 minutes. severalhoursduetolackofprocedureguidanceto
Offsite power was restored to at least one safety address particular plant conditions encountered
busatabout20:12EDTonAugust14.Thefollow- during the shutdown. The main generator was
ingequipmentproblemswerenoted:asteamgen- reconnected to the grid at about 02:08 EDT on
eratorsafetyvalveliftedbelowitsdesiredsetpoint August 18.
and was gagged; loss of instrument air, including
NineMile2.NineMile2islocated6miles(10km)
failure of the diesel backup compressor to start
northeast of Oswego, NY, in northern New York
and failure of the backup nitrogen system,
on Lake Ontario. It was generating about 1,193
resulted in manual control of atmospheric dump
MWebeforetheevent.Thereactorscrammeddue
valves and AFW pumps needing to be secured to
to the actuation of pressure switches which
preventoverfeedingthesteamgenerators;ablown
detectedlowpressureinthehydraulicsystemthat
fuse in a battery charger resulted in a longer bat-
controls the turbine control valves. Low pressure
tery discharge; a control rod drive mechanism
in this system typically indicates a large load
cablesplicefailed,andtherewerehighresistance
reject, for which a reactor trip is expected. In this
readings on 345-kV breaker-1. These equipment
case the pressure in the system was low because
problems required correction prior to startup,
the control system was rapidly manipulating the
which delayed the startup. The diesel generator
turbine control valves to control turbine speed,
for the Unit 3 Technical Support Center failed to
which was being affected by grid frequency
function.Also,severaluninterruptiblepowersup-
fluctuations.
plies in the Emergency Operations Facility failed.
This reduced the capability for communications Afterthereactortripped,severalreactorlevelcon-
and data collection. Alternate equipment was trol valves did not reposition, and with the main
used to maintain vital communications.2 The feedwater system continuing to operate, a high
main generator was reconnected to the grid at water level in the reactor caused a turbine trip,
about 05:03 EDT on August 22. which caused a generator trip. Offsite power was
degraded but available to the plant auxiliary
NineMile1.NineMile1islocated6miles(10km)
buses. The offsite power dropped below the nor-
northeast of Oswego, NY, in northern New York
mal voltage levels, which resulted in the safety
onLakeOntario.Itwasgeneratingabout600MWe
buses being automatically energized from the
before the event. The reactor tripped in response
emergency diesel generators. Decay heat removal
toaturbinetrip.Theturbinetrippedonlightload
systems maintained the cooling function for the
protection (which protects the turbine against a
reactor fuel.
lossofelectricalload),whenrespondingtofluctu-
atinggridconditions.Theturbinetripcausedfast The lowest emergency declaration, an Unusual
closure of the turbine valves, which, through Event,wasdeclaredatabout17:00EDTduetothe
acceleration relays on the control valves, create a loss of offsite power to the safety buses for more
signal to trip the reactor. After a time delay of 10 than 15 minutes. Offsite power was restored to at
seconds, the generator tripped on reverse power. leastonesafetybusatabout01:33EDTonAugust
15. The following additional equipment problem
The safety buses were automatically deenergized was noted: a tap changer on one of the offsite
due to low voltage and automatically reenergized powertransformersfailed,complicatingtheresto-
from the emergency diesel generators. Decay heat ration of one division of offsite power. The main
removal systems maintained the cooling function generator was reconnected to the grid at about
for the reactor fuel. 19:34 EDT on August 17.
The lowest emergency declaration, an Unusual Oyster Creek. Oyster Creek is located 9 miles (14
Event,wasdeclaredatabout16:33EDTduetothe km) south of Toms River, NJ, near the Atlantic
degraded offsite power. Offsite power was Ocean. It was generating about 629 MWe before
restored to at least one safety bus at about 23:39 theevent.Thereactortrippedduetoaturbinetrip.
EDT on August 14. The following additional The turbine trip was the result of a generator trip
equipment problems were noted: a feedwater duetoactuationofahighVolts/Hzprotectivetrip.
block valve failed “as is” on the loss of voltage, The Volts/Hz trip is a generator/transformer pro-
resultinginahighreactorvessellevel;fusesblew tective feature. The plant safety and auxiliary
in fire circuits, causing control room ventilation buses transferred from the main generator supply
isolationandfirepanelalarms;andoperatorswere to the offsite power supply following the plant
delayedinplacingshutdowncoolinginservicefor trip.Otherthantheplanttransient,noequipment
118  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

or performance problems were determined to be tothegridatabout23:15EDTonAugust21.After
directly related to the grid problems. the plant restarted, a surveillance test indicated a
problem with one emergency diesel generator.3
Post-triptheoperatorsdidnotgetthemodeswitch
to shutdown before main steam header pressure Nuclear Power Plants With a Significant
reacheditsisolationsetpoint.TheresultingMSIV Transient
closure complicated the operator’s response
TheelectricaldisturbanceonAugust14hadasig-
because the normal steam path to the main con-
nificant impact on seven plants that continued to
denser was lost. The operators used the isolation
remainconnectedtothegrid.Forthisreview,sig-
condensers for decay heat removal. The plant
nificantimpactmeansthattheseplantshadsignif-
safety and auxiliary buses remained energized
icant load adjustments that resulted in bypassing
from offsite power for the duration of the event,
steamfromtheturbinegenerator,openingofrelief
and the emergency diesel generators were not
valves, or requiring the onsite emergency diesel
started. Decay heat removal systems maintained
generators to automatically start due to low
thecoolingfunctionforthereactorfuel.Themain
voltage.
generator was reconnected to the grid at about
05:02 EDT on August 17. Nuclear Power Plants With a Non-Significant
Transient
Perry.Perryislocated7miles(11km)northeastof
Painesville, OH, in northern Ohio on Lake Erie. It Sixty-four nuclear power plants experienced
wasgeneratingabout1,275MWebeforetheevent. non-significanttransientscausedbyminordistur-
The reactor tripped due to a turbine control valve bances on the electrical grid. These plants were
fast closure trip signal. The turbine control valve able to respond to the disturbances through nor-
fast closure trip signal was due to a generator malcontrolsystems.Examplesofthesetransients
under-frequencytripsignalthattrippedthegener- included changes in load of a few megawatts or
atorandtheturbineandwastriggeredbygridfre- changes in frequency of a few-tenths Hz.
quencyfluctuations.Plantoperatorsnotedvoltage
Nuclear Power Plants With No Transient
fluctuations and spikes on the main transformer,
and the Generator Out-of-Step Supervisory relay Twenty-fournuclearpowerplantsexperiencedno
actuated approximately 30 minutes before the transient and saw essentially no disturbances on
trip. This supervisory relay senses a ground fault the grid, or were shut down at the time of the
on the grid. The purpose is to prevent a remote transient.
fault on the grid from causing a generator out-of-
General Observations Based on the Facts
steprelaytoactivate,whichwouldresultinagen-
eratortrip.Approximately30secondspriortothe Found During Phase One
tripoperatorsnotedanumberofspikesonthegen-
TheNWGfoundnoevidencethattheshutdownof
erator field volt meter, which subsequently went
U.S. nuclear power plants triggered the outage or
offscalehigh.TheMVArandMWmeterslikewise
inappropriately contributed to its spread (i.e., to
went offscale high.
anextentbeyondthenormaltrippingoftheplants
The safety buses were deenergized and automati- atexpectedconditions).Thisreviewdidnotiden-
cally reenergized from the emergency diesel gen- tifyanyactivityorequipmentissuesthatappeared
erators. Decay heat removal systems maintained tostartthetransient onAugust 14,2003.Allnine
the cooling function for the reactor fuel. The fol- plants that experienced a reactor trip were
lowing equipment problems were noted: a steam responding to grid conditions. The severity of the
bypassvalveopened;areactorwaterclean-upsys- transient caused generators, turbines, or reactor
tempumptripped;theoff-gassystemisolated,and systems to reach a protective feature limit and
a keep-fill pump was found to be air-bound, actuate a plant shutdown.
requiring venting and filling before the residual
Allnineplantstrippedinresponsetothosecondi-
heat removal system loop A and the low pressure
tions in a manner consistent with the plant
core spray system could be restored to service.
designs. All nine plants safely shut down. All
The lowest emergency declaration, an Unusual safety functions were effectively accomplished,
Event,wasdeclaredatabout16:20EDTduetothe with few problems, and the plants were main-
lossofoffsitepower.Offsitepowerwasrestoredto tained in a safe shutdown condition until their
at least one safety bus at about 18:13 EDT on restart. Fermi 2, Nine Mile 1, Oyster Creek, and
August 14. The main generator was reconnected Perry tripped on turbine and generator protective
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  119

features. FitzPatrick, Ginna, Indian Point 2 and 3, August 22. Indian Point 3 had equipment issues
and Nine Mile 2 tripped on reactor protective (failedsplicesinthecontrolroddrivemechanism
features. powersystem)thatrequiredrepairpriortorestart.
Ginnasubmittedaspecialrequestforenforcement
Nine plants used their emergency diesel genera-
discretion from the NRC to permit mode changes
torstopowertheirsafety-relatedbusesduringthe
andrestartwithaninoperableauxiliaryfeedwater
power outage. Offsite power was restored to the
pump. The NRC granted the request for enforce-
safety buses after the grid was energized and the
ment discretion.
plantoperators,inconsultationwiththetransmis-
sionsystemoperators,decidedthegridwasstable.
Conclusions of the U.S. Nuclear
Although the Oyster Creek plant tripped, offsite
Working Group
powerwasneverlosttotheirsafetybusesandthe
emergency diesel generators did not start and
As discussed above, the investigation of the U.S.
were not required. Another plant, Davis-Besse,
nuclear power plant responses during the
wasalreadyshutdownbutlostpowertothesafety
blackout found no significant deficiencies.
buses. The emergency diesel generators started
Accordingly, there are no recommendations here
and provided power to the safety buses as
concerningU.S.nuclearpowerplants.Someareas
designed.
for consideration on a grid-wide basis were dis-
For the eight remaining tripped plants and cussed and forwarded to the Electric System
Davis-Besse (which was already shut down prior Working Group for their review.
to the events of August 14), offsite power was
On August 14, 2003, nine U.S. nuclear power
restored to at least one safety bus after a period of
plants tripped as a result of the loss of offsite
timerangingfromabout2hourstoabout14hours,
power.Nuclearpowerplantsaredesignedtocope
with an average time of about 7 hours. Although
with the loss of offsite power (LOOP) through the
Ginna did not lose offsite power, the operators
use of emergency power supplies (primarily
judged offsite power to be unstable and realigned
on-site diesel generators). The safety function of
the safety buses to the emergency diesel
most concern during a LOOP is the removal of
generators.
heat from the reactor core. Although the control
