instances, there may be a need for employees to sub-team was staffed with Subject Matter Experts
monitor SCADA systems remotely. However, (SMEs)fromgovernment,industry,andacademia
connectingSCADAsystemstoaremotelyaccessi- toprovidetheanalyticalbreadthanddepthneces-
ble computer network can present security risks. sary to complete each sub-team’s objective. A
These risks include the compromise of sensitive detailed overview of the sub-team structure and
operating information and the threat of un- activities for each sub-team is provided below.
authorized access to SCADA systems’ control
1. Cyber Analysis
mechanisms.
Securityhasalwaysbeenapriorityfortheelectric- The Cyber Analysis sub-team was led by the
ity sector in North America; however, it is a CERT® Coordination Center (CERT/CC) at Carne-
greaterprioritynowthaneverbefore.CAsandRCs gie Mellon University and the Royal Canadian
recognizethatthethreatenvironmentischanging Mounted Police (RCMP). This team was focused
andthattherisksaregreaterthaninthepast,and on analyzing and reviewing electronic media of
they have taken steps towards improving their computer networks in which online communica-
security postures. NERC’s Critical Infrastructure tions take place. The sub-team examined these
Protection Advisory Group has been examining networks to determine if they were maliciously
waystoimproveboththephysicalandcybersecu- used to cause, or contribute to the August 14,
rity dimensions of the North American power 2003, outage. Specifically, the SWG reviewed
grid. This group is comprised of Canadian and materials created on behalf of DHS’s National
U.S. industry experts in the areas of cyber secu- Communication System (NCS). These materials
rity, physical security and operational security. covered the analysis and conclusions of their
ThecreationofanationalSCADAprogramisnow Internet Protocol (IP) modeling correlation study
also under discussion in the U.S. to improve the ofBlaster(amaliciousInternetwormfirstnoticed
physical and cyber security of these control on August 11, 2003) and the power outage. This
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  133

NCS analysis supports the SWG’s finding that general nature relating to the sector which was
viruses and worms prevalent across the Internet provided to the North American energy industry
at the time of the outage did not have any signifi- byU.S.andCanadianGovernmentagenciesinlate
cant impact on power generation and delivery July 2003. This information indicated that
systems.Theteamalsoconductedinterviewswith al-Qaeda might attempt to carry out a physical
vendors to identify known system flaws and attackinvolvingexplosionsatoilproductionfacil-
vulnerabilities. ities, power plants or nuclear plants on the east
coast of the U.S. during the summer of 2003. The
This sub-team took a number of steps, including
type of physical attack described in the intelli-
reviewing NERC reliability standards to gain a
gence that prompted this threat warning is not
better understanding of the overall security pos-
consistentwiththeeventscausingthepowerout-
ture of the electric power industry. Additionally,
age as there was no indication of a kinetic event
the sub-team participated in meetings in Balti-
before, during, or immediately after the power
more on August 22 and 23, 2003. The meetings
outage of August 14, 2003.
providedanopportunityforthecyberexpertsand
the power industry experts to understand the Despitealloftheaboveindicationsthatnoterror-
details necessary to conduct an investigation. ist activity caused the power outage, al-Qaeda
publiclyclaimedresponsibilityforitsoccurrence:
Members of the sub-team also participated in the
NERC/Department of Energy (DOE) Fact Finding   August 18, 2003: Al-Hayat, an Egyptian media
meeting held in Newark, New Jersey on Septem- outlet, published excerpts from a communiqué
ber8,2003.Eachcompanyinvolvedintheoutage attributedtoal-Qaeda.AlHayatclaimedtohave
provided answers to a set of questions related to obtained the communiqué from the website of
theoutage.Themeetinghelpedtoprovideabetter the International Islamic Media Center. The
understanding of what each company experi- contentofthecommuniquéassertsthatthe“bri-
enced before, during and after the outage. Addi- gades of Abu Fahes Al Masri had hit two main
tionally, sub-team members participated in power plants supplying the East of the U.S., as
interviews with grid operators from FirstEnergy well as major industrial cities in the U.S. and
on October 8 and 9, 2003, and from Cinergy on Canada, . . . its ally in the war against Islam
October 10, 2003. (New York and Toronto) and their neighbors.”
Furthermore,theoperation“wascarriedouton
2. Intelligence Analysis theordersofOsamabinLadentohitthepillars
of the U.S. economy,” as “a realization of bin
The Intelligence Analysis sub-team was led by
Laden’spromisetooffertheIraqipeopleapres-
DHS and the RCMP, which worked closely with
ent.”Thecommuniquédoesnotspecifytheway
Federal, State and local law enforcement, intelli-
the alleged sabotage was carried out, but does
gence and homeland security organizations to
elaborate on the alleged damage the sabotage
assesswhetherthepoweroutagewastheresultof
caused to the U.S. economy in the areas of
a malicious attack.
finance,transportation,energyandtelecommu-
SWG analysis provided no evidence that mali- nications.
cious actors—be they individuals or organiza-
Additional claims and commentary regarding the
tions—wereresponsiblefor,orcontributedto,the
poweroutageappearedinvariousMiddleEastern
power outage of August 14, 2003. Additionally,
media outlets:
the sub-team found no indication of deliberate
physicaldamagetopowergeneratingstationsand   August 26, 2003: A conservative Iranian daily
delivery lines on the day of the outage and there newspaper published a commentary regarding
were no reports indicating the power outage was the potential of computer technology as a tool
caused by a computer network attack. for terrorists against infrastructures dependent
on computer networks, most notably water,
Both U.S. and Canadian government authorities
electric, public transportation, trade organiza-
provide threat intelligence information to their
tions and “supranational” companies in the
respective energy sectors when appropriate. No
United States.
intelligence reports prior to, during or after the
poweroutageindicatedanyspecificterroristplans   September 4, 2003: An Islamist participant in a
or operations against the energy infrastructure. Jihadist chat room forum claimed that sleeper
There was, however, threat information of a cells associated with al-Qaeda used the power
134  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

outage as a cover to infiltrate the U.S. from the sub-team sought to determine if the physical
Canada. integrity of these cyber facilities was breached,
whether externally or by an insider, prior to or
However, these claims as known are not consis-
during the outage, and if so, whether such a
tent with the SWG’s findings. They are also not
breachcausedorcontributedtothepoweroutage.
consistent with congressional testimony of the
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). Larry A. Althoughthesub-teamanalyzedinformationpro-
Mefford,ExecutiveAssistantDirectorinchargeof vided to both the ESWG and Nuclear Working
the FBI’s Counterterrorism and Counterintelli- Groups, the Physical Analysis sub-team also
genceprograms,testifiedinU.S.CongressonSep- reviewed information resulting from face-to-face
tember 4, 2003, that: meetings with energy sector personnel and
site-visits to energy sector facilities to determine
“To date, we have not discovered any evidence
the physical integrity of the cyber infrastructure.
indicatingthattheoutagewasaresultofactivity
by international or domestic terrorists or other
The sub-team compiled a list of questions cover-
criminal activity.”2
inglocation,accessibility,cameras,alarms,locks,
Mr. Mefford also testified that: fireprotectionandwatersystemsastheyapplyto
computer server rooms. Based on discussions of
“The FBI has received no specific, credible
these questions during its interviews, the
threats to electronic power grids in the United
sub-team found no evidence that the physical
StatesintherecentpastandtheclaimoftheAbu
integrityofthecyberinfrastructurewasbreached.
Hafs al-Masri Brigade to have caused the black-
Additionally, the sub-team examined access and
outappearstobenomorethanwishfulthinking.
control measures used to allow entry into com-
We have no information confirming the actual
mand and control facilities and the integrity of
existence of this group.”3
remote facilities.
Current assessments suggest that there are terror-
The sub-team also concentrated on mechanisms
istsandothermaliciousactorswhohavethecapa-
usedbythecompaniestoreportunusualincidents
bility to conduct a malicious cyber attack with
withinserverrooms,commandandcontrolrooms
potential to disrupt the energy infrastructure.
andremotefacilities.Thesub-teamalsoaddressed
Although such an attack cannot be ruled out
the possibility of an insider attack on the cyber
entirely, an examination of available information
infrastructure.
and intelligence does not support any claims of a
deliberateattackagainsttheenergyinfrastructure
4. Policies and Procedures
on, or leading up to, August 14, 2003. The few
instances of physical damage that occurred on The Policies and Procedures sub-team was led by
power delivery lines were the result of natural DHS and Public Safety and Emergency Prepared-
eventsandnotofsabotage.Nointelligencereports ness Canada. Personnel from these organizations
priorto,duringorafterthepoweroutageindicated have strong backgrounds in the fields of electric
any specific terrorist plans or operations against delivery operations, automated control systems
the energy infrastructure. No incident reports including SCADA and EMS, and information
detail suspicious activity near the power genera- security.
tion plants or delivery lines in question.
This sub-team was focused on examining the
3. Physical Analysis overall policies and procedures that may or may
not have been in place during the events leading
The Physical Analysis sub-team was led by the up to and during the power outage of August 14,
UnitedStatesSecretServiceandtheRCMP.These 2003. Policies that the team examined revolved
organizationshaveaparticularexpertiseinphysi- centrally around the cyber systems of the compa-
calsecurityassessmentsintheenergysector.The niesidentifiedintheearlystagesofthepowerout-
sub-team focused on issues related to how the age. Of specific interest to the team were policies
cyber-relatedfacilitiesoftheenergysectorcompa- andproceduresregardingtheupgradeandmainte-
niesweresecured,includingthephysicalintegrity nance (to include system patching) of the com-
ofdatacentersandcontrolroomsalongwithsecu- mandandcontrol(C2)systems,includingSCADA
rityproceduresandpoliciesusedtolimitaccessto and EMS. The Policies and Procedures sub-team
sensitive areas. Focusing on the facilities identi- was also interested in the procedures for contin-
fied as having a causal relationship to the outage, gencyoperationsandrestorationofsystemsinthe
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  135

event of a computer system failure, or a cyber betweenthepoweroutageandmaliciousactivity,
event such as an active hack or the discovery of whether physical or cyber initiated.
malicious code.
Cyber Timeline
5. Supporting Infrastructure
The Supporting Infrastructure sub-team was led The following sequence of events was derived
by a DHS expert with experience assessing sup- from discussions with representatives of
porting infrastructure elements such as water FirstEnergyandtheMidwestIndependentSystem
coolingforcomputersystems,back-uppowersys- Operator (MISO). All times are approximate.
tems, heating, ventilation and air conditioning
Thefirstsignificantcyber-relatedeventofAugust
(HVAC),andsupportingtelecommunicationsnet-
14, 2003, occurred at 12:40 EDT at the MISO. At
works.PublicSafetyandEmergencyPreparedness
this time, a MISO EMS engineer purposely dis-
Canada was the Canadian co-lead for this effort.
abled the automatic periodic trigger on the State
Thisteamanalyzedtheintegrityofthesupporting
Estimator (SE) application, an application that
infrastructureanditsrole,ifany,inthepowerout-
allows MISO to determine the real-time state of
age on August 14, 2003. It sought to determine
the power system for its region. The disablement
whether the supporting infrastructure was per-
of the automatic periodic trigger, a program fea-
forming at a satisfactory level leading up to and
turethatcausestheSEtorunautomaticallyevery
during the power outage of August 14, 2003. In
five minutes, is a necessary operating procedure
addition, the team verified with vendors if there
when resolving a mismatched solution produced
weremaintenanceissuesthatmayhaveimpacted
by the SE. The EMS engineer determined that the
operations prior to and during the outage.
mismatch in the SE solution was due to the SE
model depicting Cinergy’s Bloomington-Denois
The sub-team specifically focused on the follow-
Creek230-kVlineasbeinginservice,whenithad
ing key issues in visits to each of the designated
actually been out of service since 12:12 EDT.
electrical entities:
At 13:00 EDT, after making the appropriate
1.Carrier/provider/vendor for the supporting
changes to the SE model and manually triggering
infrastructure services and/or systems at select
the SE, the MISO EMS engineer achieved two
company facilities;
valid solutions.
2.Loss of service before and/or after the power
At 13:30 EDT, the MISO EMS engineer went to
outage;
lunch. However, he forgot to re-engage the auto-
3.Conductofmaintenanceactivitiesbeforeand/or matic periodic trigger.
after the power outage;
At14:14EDT,FirstEnergy’s“AlarmandEventPro-
4.Conduct of installation activities before and/or cessing Routine,” (AEPR) a key software program
after the power outage; thatgivesgridoperatorsvisualandaudibleindica-
tions of events occurring on their portion of the
5.Conduct of testing activities before and/or after
grid,begantomalfunction.FirstEnergygridopera-
the power outage;
torswereunawarethatthesoftwarewasnotfunc-
6.Conduct of exercises before and/or after the tioning properly. This software did not become
power outage; and functional again until much later that evening.
7.Existenceofamonitoringprocess(log,checklist At14:40EDT,anOpsEngineerdiscoveredtheSE
etc.)todocumentthestatusofsupportinginfra- was not solving and went to notify an EMS engi-
structure services. neer that the SE was not solving.
At 14:41 EDT, FirstEnergy’s server running the
6. Root Cause Analysis
AEPRsoftwarefailedtothebackupserver.Control
room staff remained unaware that the AEPR soft-
The SWG Root Cause Liaison Sub-Team (SWG/
ware was not functioning properly.
RC) followed the work of the ESWG to identify
potentialrootcausesofthepoweroutage.Asthese At 14:44 EDT, a MISO EMS engineer, after being
rootcauseelementswereidentified,thesub-team alertedbytheOpsEngineer,re-activatedtheauto-
assessed with the ESWG any potential linkages matic periodic trigger and, for speed, manually
to physical and/or cyber malfeasance. The final triggered the program. However, the SE program
analysisoftheSWG/RCteamfoundnocausallink again showed a mismatch.
136  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

At 14:54 EDT, FirstEnergy’s backup server failed. thoughttheStuart-Atlantalinewasoutofservice.
AEPRcontinuedtomalfunction.TheAreaControl Grid operators referred to their “Outage Sched-
Error Calculations (ACE) and Strip Charting rou- uler” and informed the EMS Engineer that their
tinesmalfunctionedandthedispatcheruserinter- datashowedtheStuart-Atlantalinewas“up”and
face slowed significantly. thattheEMSengineershoulddepictthelineasin
service in the SE model. At 15:17 EDT, the EMS
At 15:00 EDT, FirstEnergy used its emergency
engineer ran the SE with the Stuart-Atlanta line
backup system to control the system and make
“live,” but the model again mismatched.
ACE calculations. ACE calculations and control
At 15:29 EDT, the MISO EMS Engineer asked
systems continued to run on the emergency
MISOgridoperatorstocallPJMInterconnect,LLC
backupsystemuntilroughly15:08EDT,whenthe
to determine the status of the Stuart-Atlanta line.
primary server was restored.
MISO was informed that the Stuart-Atlanta line
At 15:05 EDT, FirstEnergy’s Harding-Chamberlin trippedat14:02EDT.TheEMSEngineeradjusted
345-kV line tripped and locked out. FirstEnergy the model, which by this time had been updated
gridoperatorsdidnotreceivenotificationfromthe with the 15:05 EDT Harding-Chamberlin 345-kV
AEPR software which continued to malfunction, line trip, and came up with a valid solution.
unbeknownst to the FirstEnergy grid operators.
At 15:32 EDT, FirstEnergy’s Hanna-Juniper
At 15:08 EDT, using data obtained at roughly 345-kV line tripped and locked out. The AEPR
15:04EDT(ittakesroughlyfiveminutesfortheSE continued to malfunction.
to provide a result), the MISO EMS engineer con-
At 15:41 EDT, the lights flickered at the
