estimator and reliability assessment functions on August 14. There is a need to review options for
sharing of outage information in the operating time horizon (e.g. 15 minutes or less), so as to ensure
the accurate and timely sharing of outage data necessary to support real-time operating tools such as
state estimators, real-time contingency analysis, and other system monitoring tools.
On August 14, reliability coordinator and control area communications regarding conditions in
northeastern Ohio were ineffective, and in some cases confusing. Ineffective communications
contributed to a lack of situational awareness and precluded effective actions to prevent the cascade.
Consistent application of effective communications protocols, particularly during emergencies, is
essential to reliability. Alternatives should be considered to one-on-one phone calls during an
emergency to ensure all parties are getting timely and accurate information with a minimum number
of calls.
NERC operating policies do not adequately specify critical facilities, leaving ambiguity regarding
which facilities must be monitored by reliability coordinators. Nor do the policies adequately define
criteria for declaring transmission system emergencies. Operating policies should also clearly specify
that curtailing interchange transactions through the NERC Transmission Loading Relief (TLR)
Procedure is not intended as a method for restoring the system from an actual Operating Security
Limit violation to a secure operating state.
Recommendation 9: The Operating Committee shall complete the following by June 30,
2004:
• Evaluate and revise the operating policies and procedures, or provide interpretations,
to ensure reliability coordinator and control area functions, responsibilities, and
authorities are completely and unambiguously defined.
• Evaluate and improve the tools and procedures for operator and reliability
coordinator communications during emergencies.
• Evaluate and improve the tools and procedures for the timely exchange of outage
information among control areas and reliability coordinators.
Approved by the Board of Trustees 13
February 10, 2004
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  205

Recommendation 10. Establish Guidelines for Real-Time Operating Tools.
The August 14 blackout was caused by a lack of situational awareness that was in turn the result of
inadequate reliability tools and backup capabilities. Additionally, the failure of FE’s control
computers and alarm system contributed directly to the lack of situational awareness. Likewise,
MISO’s incomplete tool set and the failure of its state estimator to work effectively on August 14
contributed to the lack of situational awareness.
Recommendation 10: The Operating Committee shall within one year evaluate the real-time
operating tools necessary for reliable operation and reliability coordination, including backup
capabilities. The Operating Committee is directed to report both minimum acceptable
capabilities for critical reliability functions and a guide of best practices.
This evaluation should include consideration of the following:
• Modeling requirements, such as model size and fidelity, real and reactive load modeling,
sensitivity analyses, accuracy analyses, validation, measurement, observability, update
procedures, and procedures for the timely exchange of modeling data.
• State estimation requirements, such as periodicity of execution, monitoring external facilities,
solution quality, topology error and measurement error detection, failure rates including times
between failures, presentation of solution results including alarms, and troubleshooting
procedures.
• Real-time contingency analysis requirements, such as contingency definition, periodicity of
execution, monitoring external facilities, solution quality, post-contingency automatic actions,
failure rates including mean/maximum times between failures, reporting of results,
presentation of solution results including alarms, and troubleshooting procedures including
procedures for investigating unsolvable contingencies.
Recommendation 11. Evaluate Lessons Learned During System Restoration.
The efforts to restore the power system and customer service following the outage were effective,
considering the massive amount of load lost and the large number of generators and transmission
lines that tripped. Fortunately, the restoration was aided by the ability to energize transmission from
neighboring systems, thereby speeding the recovery. Despite the apparent success of the restoration
effort, it is important to evaluate the results in more detail to determine opportunities for
improvement. Blackstart and restoration plans are often developed through study of simulated
conditions. Robust testing of live systems is difficult because of the risk of disturbing the system or
interrupting customers. The August 14 blackout provides a valuable opportunity to apply actual
events and experiences to learn to better prepare for system blackstart and restoration in the future.
That opportunity should not be lost, despite the relative success of the restoration phase of the outage.
Recommendation 11a: The Planning Committee, working in conjunction with the Operating
Committee, NPCC, ECAR, and PJM, shall evaluate the black start and system restoration
performance following the outage of August 14, and within one year report to the NERC board
the results of that evaluation with recommendations for improvement.
Approved by the Board of Trustees 14
February 10, 2004
206  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

Recommendation 11b: All regional reliability councils shall, within six months of the Planning
Committee report to the NERC board, reevaluate their procedures and plans to assure an
effective blackstart and restoration capability within their region.
Recommendation 12. Install Additional Time-Synchronized Recording Devices as Needed.
A valuable lesson from the August 14 blackout is the importance of having time-synchronized system
data recorders. NERC investigators labored over thousands of data items to synchronize the
sequence of events, much like putting together small pieces of a very large puzzle. That process
would have been significantly improved and sped up if there had been a sufficient number of
synchronized data recording devices.
NERC Planning Standard I.F – Disturbance Monitoring does require location of recording devices for
disturbance analysis. Often time, recorders are available, but they are not synchronized to a time
standard. All digital fault recorders, digital event recorders, and power system disturbance recorders
should be time stamped at the point of observation with a precise Global Positioning Satellite (GPS)
synchronizing signal. Recording and time-synchronization equipment should be monitored and
calibrated to assure accuracy and reliability.
Time-synchronized devices, such as phasor measurement units, can also be beneficial for monitoring
a wide-area view of power system conditions in real-time, such as demonstrated in WECC with their
Wide-Area Monitoring System (WAMS).
Recommendation 12a: The reliability regions, coordinated through the NERC Planning
Committee, shall within one year define regional criteria for the application of synchronized
recording devices in power plants and substations. Regions are requested to facilitate the
installation of an appropriate number, type and location of devices within the region as soon as
practical to allow accurate recording of future system disturbances and to facilitate
benchmarking of simulation studies by comparison to actual disturbances.
Recommendation 12b: Facilities owners shall, in accordance with regional criteria, upgrade
existing dynamic recorders to include GPS time synchronization and, as necessary, install
additional dynamic recorders.
Recommendation 13. Reevaluate System Design, Planning and Operating Criteria.
The investigation report noted that FE entered the day on August 14 with insufficient resources to
stay within operating limits following a credible set of contingencies, such as the loss of the East
Lake 5 unit and the Chamberlin-Harding line. NERC will conduct an evaluation of operations
planning practices and criteria to ensure expected practices are sufficient and well understood. The
review will reexamine fundamental operating criteria, such as n-1 and the 30-minute limit in
preparing the system for a next contingency, and Table I Category C.3 of the NERC planning
standards. Operations planning and operating criteria will be identified that are sufficient to ensure
the system is in a known and reliable condition at all times, and that positive controls, whether
Approved by the Board of Trustees 15
February 10, 2004
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  207

manual or automatic, are available and appropriately located at all times to return the Interconnection
to a secure condition. Daily operations planning, and subsequent real time operations planning will
identify available system reserves to meet operating criteria.
Recommendation 13a: The Operating Committee shall evaluate operations planning and
operating criteria and recommend revisions in a report to the board within one year.
Prior studies in the ECAR region did not adequately define the system conditions that were observed
on August 14. Severe contingency criteria were not adequate to address the events of August 14 that
led to the uncontrolled cascade. Also, northeastern Ohio was found to have insufficient reactive
support to serve its loads and meet import criteria. Instances were also noted in the FE system and
ECAR area of different ratings being used for the same facility by planners and operators and among
entities, making the models used for system planning and operation suspect. NERC and the regional
reliability councils must take steps to assure facility ratings are being determined using consistent
criteria and being effectively shared and reviewed among entities and among planners and operators.
Recommendation 13b: ECAR shall no later than June 30, 2004 reevaluate its planning and
study procedures and practices to ensure they are in compliance with NERC standards, ECAR
Document No. 1, and other relevant criteria; and that ECAR and its members’ studies are
being implemented as required.
Recommendation 13c: The Planning Committee, working in conjunction with the regional
reliability councils, shall within two years reevaluate the criteria, methods and practices used
for system design, planning and analysis; and shall report the results and recommendations to
the NERC board. This review shall include an evaluation of transmission facility ratings
methods and practices, and the sharing of consistent ratings information.
Regional reliability councils may consider assembling a regional database that includes the ratings of
all bulk electric system (100 kV and higher voltage) transmission lines, transformers, phase angle
regulators, and phase shifters. This database should be shared with neighboring regions as needed for
system planning and analysis.
NERC and the regional reliability councils should review the scope, frequency, and coordination of
interregional studies, to include the possible need for simultaneous transfer studies. Study criteria
will be reviewed, particularly the maximum credible contingency criteria used for system analysis.
Each control area will be required to identify, for both the planning and operating time horizons, the
planned emergency import capabilities for each major load area.
Recommendation 14. Improve System Modeling Data and Data Exchange Practices.
The after-the-fact models developed to simulate August 14 conditions and events indicate that
dynamic modeling assumptions, including generator and load power factors, used in planning and
operating models were inaccurate. Of particular note, the assumptions of load power factor were
overly optimistic (loads were absorbing much more reactive power than pre-August 14 models
indicated). Another suspected problem is modeling of shunt capacitors under depressed voltage
Approved by the Board of Trustees 16
February 10, 2004
208  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

conditions. Regional reliability councils should establish regional power system models that enable
the sharing of consistent, validated data among entities in the region. Power flow and transient
stability simulations should be periodically compared (benchmarked) with actual system events to
validate model data. Viable load (including load power factor) and generator testing programs are
necessary to improve agreement between power flows and dynamic simulations and the actual system
performance.
Recommendation 14: The regional reliability councils shall within one year establish and begin
implementing criteria and procedures for validating data used in power flow models and
dynamic simulations by benchmarking model data with actual system performance. Validated
modeling data shall be exchanged on an inter-regional basis as needed for reliable system
planning and operation.
During the data collection phase of the blackout investigation, when control areas were asked for
information pertaining to merchant generation within their area, data was frequently not supplied.
The reason often given was that the control area did not know the status or output of the generator at
a given point in time. Another reason was the commercial sensitivity or confidentiality of such data.
Approved by the Board of Trustees 17
February 10, 2004
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  209



Appendix E
List of Electricity Acronyms
AEP American Electric Power
BPA Bonneville Power Administration
CA Control area
CNSC Canadian Nuclear Safety Commission
DOE Department of Energy (U.S.)
ECAR East Central Area Reliability Coordination Agreement
EIA Energy Information Administration (U.S. DOE)
EMS Energy management system
ERCOT Electric Reliability Council of Texas
ERO Electric reliability organization
FE FirstEnergy
FERC Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (U.S.)
FRCC Florida Reliability Coordinating Council
GW, GWh Gigawatt, Gigawatt-hour
IEEE Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
IPP Independent power producer
ISAC Information Sharing and Analysis Center
kV, kVAr Kilovolt, Kilovolt-Amperes-reactive
kW, kWh Kilowatt, Kilowatt-hour
MAAC Mid-Atlantic Area Council
MAIN Mid-America Interconnected Network
MAPP Mid-Continent Area Power Pool
MECS Michigan Electrical Coordinated Systems
MVA, MVAr Megavolt-Amperes, Megavolt-Amperes-reactive
MW, MWh Megawatt, Megawatt-hour
NERC North American Electric Reliability Council
NESC National Electricity Safety Code
NPCC Northeast Power Coordinating Council
NRC Nuclear Regulatory Commission (U.S.)
NRCan Natural Resources Canada
OASIS Open Access Same Time Information Service
OETD Office of Electric Transmission and Distribution (U.S. DOE)
PJM PJM Interconnection
PUC Public utility (or public service) commission (state)
RC Reliability coordinator
ROW Right-of-Way (transmission or distribution line, pipeline, etc.)
RRC Regional reliability council
RTO Regional Transmission Organization
SCADA Supervisory control and data acquisition
SERC Southeast Electric Reliability Council
SPP Southwest Power Pool
TVA Tennessee Valley Authority (U.S.)
WECC Western Electricity Coordinating Council
  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations   211



Appendix F
Electricity Glossary
AC:Alternatingcurrent;currentthatchangesperi- often used to compensate for reactive load and
odically (sinusoidally) with time. helpsupportsystemvoltage.Abankisacollection
of one or more capacitors at a single location.
ACE: Area Control Error in MW. A negative value
indicates a condition of under-generation relative Capacity: The rated continuous load-carrying
to system load and imports, and a positive value ability, expressed in megawatts (MW) or
denotes over-generation. megavolt-amperes(MVA)ofgeneration,transmis-
sion, or other electrical equipment.
Active Power: See “Real Power.”
Cascading: The uncontrolled successive loss of
Adequacy: The ability of the electric system to
system elements triggered by an incident. Cas-
supplytheaggregateelectricaldemandandenergy
cadingresultsinwidespreadserviceinterruption,
requirementsofcustomersatalltimes,takinginto
which cannot be restrained from sequentially
account scheduled and reasonably expected
spreading beyond an area predetermined by
unscheduled outages of system elements.
appropriate studies.
AGC:AutomaticGenerationControlisacomputa-
Circuit: A conductor or a system of conductors
tion based on measured frequency and computed
through which electric current flows.
economic dispatch. Generation equipment under
AGC automatically responds to signals from an
CircuitBreaker:Aswitchingdeviceconnectedto
EMScomputerinrealtimetoadjustpoweroutput
the end of a transmission line capable of opening
in response to a change in system frequency,
or closing the circuit in response to a command,
tie-line loading, or to a prescribed relation
usually from a relay.
between these quantities. Generator output is
adjusted so as to maintain a target system fre- ControlArea:Anelectricpowersystemorcombi-
quency (usually 60 Hz) and any scheduled MW nation of electric power systems to which a com-
interchange with other areas. monautomaticcontrolschemeisappliedinorder
to:(1)match,atalltimes,thepoweroutputofthe
Apparent Power: The product of voltage and cur-
generatorswithintheelectricpowersystem(s)and
rentphasors.Itcomprisesbothactiveandreactive
capacity and energy purchased from entities out-
power, usually expressed in kilovoltamperes
sidetheelectricpowersystem(s),withtheloadin
(kVA) or megavoltamperes (MVA).
the electric power system(s); (2) maintain, within
Blackstart Capability: The ability of a generating the limits of Good Utility Practice, scheduled
unitorstationtogofromashutdownconditionto interchange with other Control Areas; (3) main-
anoperatingconditionandstartdeliveringpower tain the frequency of the electric power system(s)
without assistance from the bulk electric system. within reasonable limits in accordance with
Good Utility Practice; and (4) provide sufficient
Bulk Electric System: A term commonly applied
generatingcapacitytomaintainoperatingreserves
to the portion of an electric utility system that
in accordance with Good Utility Practice.
encompasses the electrical generation resources
and bulk transmission system. Contingency:Theunexpected failureoroutageof
a system component, such as a generator, trans-
BulkTransmission:Afunctionalorvoltageclassi-
missionline,circuitbreaker,switch,orotherelec-
fication relating to the higher voltage portion of
trical element. A contingency also may include
the transmission system, specifically, lines at or
multiple components, which are related by situa-
