failed,dueeithertothestallingofthealarmappli-
alarm system was again Recommendation
cation, “queuing” to the remote EMS terminals, 19, page 156
working properly with the
or some combination of the two. Following pre-
control room operators.
programmedinstructions,thealarmsystemappli-
cation and all other EMS software running on the Another casualty of the loss of both servers was
first server automatically transferred (“failed- theAutomaticGenerationControl(AGC)function
over”) onto the back-up server. However, because hosted on those computers. Loss of AGC meant
the alarm application moved intact onto the that FE’s operators could not run affiliated
backup while still stalled and ineffective, the powerplantsonpre-setprogramstorespondauto-
backup server failed 13 minutes later, at 14:54 matically to meet FE’s system load and inter-
EDT. Accordingly, all of the EMS applications on change obligations. Although the AGC did not
these two servers stopped workfrom14:54EDTto15:08EDTand15:46EDT
Recommendation
running. 22, page 159 to 15:59 EDT (periods when both servers were
down), this loss of function
Cause 2 The concurrent loss of both EMS doesnotappeartohavehad Recommendation
Inadequate serversapparentlycausedseveral an effect on the blackout. 22, page 159
Situational new problems for FE’s EMS and
Awareness the operators who used it. Tests The concurrent loss of the EMS
Cause 2
run during FE’s after-the-fact servers also caused the failure of
Inadequate
analysis of the alarm failure event indicate that a Situational FE’s strip chart function. There
concurrent absence of these servers can signifi- Awareness are many strip charts in the FE
cantly slow down the rate at which the EMS sys- ReliabilityOperatorcontrolroom
tem puts new—or refreshes existing—displays on driven by the EMS computers, showing a variety
54  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

of system conditions, including raw ACE (Area EDT and 15:59 EDT, when the two servers were
ControlError),FEsystemload,andSammis-South down. This meant that generators were not con-
Canton and South Canton-Star loading. These trolledduringtheseperiodstomeetFE’sloadand
chartsarevisibleinthereliabilityoperatorcontrol interchangeobligations(exceptfrom15:00EDTto
room. The chart printers continued to scroll but 15:09EDTwhencontrolwasswitchedtoabackup
because the underlying computer system was controller). There were no apparent negative con-
locked up the chart pens showed only the last sequences from this failure. It has not been estab-
valid measurement recorded, without any varia- lished how loss of the primary generation control
tion from that measurement as time progressed signal was identified or if any discussions
(i.e.,thecharts“flat-lined”).Thereisnoindication occurred with respect to the computer system’s
that any operators noticed or reported the failed operational status.15
operation of the charts.14 The few charts fed by
EMS System History. The EMS in service at FE’s
direct analog telemetry, rather than the EMS sys-
Ohio control center is a GE Harris (now GE Net-
tem, showed primarily frequency data, and
work Systems) XA21 system. It was initially
remained available throughout the afternoon of
broughtintoservicein1995.Otherthantheappli-
August 14. These yield little useful system infor-
cationofminorsoftwarefixesorpatchestypically
mation for operational purposes.
encounteredintheongoingmaintenanceandsup-
FE’sAreaControlError(ACE),theprimarycontrol port of such a system, the last major updates or
signal used to adjust generators and imports to revisions to this EMS were implemented in 1998.
match load obligations, did not function between On August 14 the system was not running the
14:54EDTand15:08EDTandlaterbetween15:46 mostcurrentreleaseoftheXA21software.FEhad
Who Saw What?
What data and tools did others have to monitor FlowgateMonitoringTool: Whileaninaccuracy
the conditions on the FE system? hasbeenidentifiedwithregardtothistoolitstill
functioned with reasonable accuracy and
Midwest ISO (MISO), reliability coordinator for
prompted MISO to call FE to discuss the
FE
Hanna-Juniper line problem. It would not have
Alarms: MISO received indications of breaker
identified problems south of Star since that was
trips in FE that registered in MISO’s alarms;
notpartoftheflowgateandthusnotmodeledin
however, the alarms were missed. These alarms
MISO’s flowgate monitor.
requirealook-uptolinktheflaggedbreakerwith
AEP
the associated line or equipment and unless this
line was specifically monitored, require another ContingencyAnalysis:Accordingtointerviews,b
look-up to link the line to the monitored AEPhadcontingencyanalysisthatcoveredlines
flowgate. MISO operators did not have the capa- intoStar.TheAEPoperatoridentifiedaproblem
bilitytoclickontheon-screenalarmindicatorto for Star-South Canton overloads for a Sammis-
display the underlying information. Star line loss about 15:33 EDT and asked PJM to
developTLRsforthis.However,duetothesizeof
Real Time Contingency Analysis (RTCA): The
the requested TLR, this was not implemented
contingency analysis showed several hundred
before the line tripped out of service.
violations around 15:00 EDT. This included
someFEviolations,whichMISO(FE’sreliability Alarms: Since a number of lines cross between
coordinator) operators discussed with PJM AEP’s and FE’s systems, they had the ability at
(AEP’s Reliability Coordinator).a Simulations their respective end of each line to identify con-
developed for this investigation show that viola- tingencies that would affect both. AEP initially
tions for a contingency would have occurred noticed FE line problems with the first and sub-
after the Harding-Chamberlin trip at 15:05 EDT. sequent trips of the Star-South Canton 345-kV
There is no indication that MISO addressed this line, and called FE three times between 14:35
issue. It is not known whether MISO identified EDT and 15:45 EDT to determine whether FE
the developing Sammis-Star problem. knew the cause of the outage.c
a“MISOSiteVisit,”Benbowinterview.
b“AEPSiteVisit,”Ulrichinterview.
cExampleat14:35,Channel4;15:19,Channel4;15:45,Channel14(FEtranscripts).
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  55

decided well before August room staff either when they began work on the
Recommendation
14 to replace it with one 33, page 164 serversat14:54EDT,orwhentheycompletedthe
from another vendor. primaryserverrestartat15:08EDT.At15:42EDT,
theITstaffwerefirsttoldofthealarmproblemby
FE personnel told the investigation team that the
acontrolroomoperator;FEhasstatedtoinvestiga-
alarm processing application had failed on occa-
tors that their IT staff had been unaware before
sions prior to August 14, leading to loss of the
then that the alarm processing sub-system of the
alarmingofsystemconditionsandeventsforFE’s
EMS was not working.
operators.16 However, FE said that the mode and
behaviorofthisparticularfailureeventwereboth Without the EMS systems, the only remaining
firsttimeoccurrencesandoneswhich,atthetime, ways to monitor system conditions would have
FE’s IT personnel neither recognized nor knew been through telephone calls and direct analog
how to correct. FE staff told investigators that it telemetry.FEcontrolroompersonneldidnotreal-
was only during a post-outage support call with ize that alarm processing on their EMS was not
GE late on 14 August that FE and GE determined workingand,subsequently,didnotmonitorother
that the only available course of action to correct available telemetry.
the alarm problem was a “cold reboot”17 of FE’s
During the afternoon of August
overall XA21 system. In interviews immediately Cause 2
Inadequate 14, FE operators talked to their
after the blackout, FE IT personnel indicated that
Situational field personnel, MISO, PJM (con-
they discussed a cold reboot of the XA21 system
Awareness cerning an adjoining system in
withcontrolroomoperatorsaftertheyweretoldof
PJM’s reliability coordination
the alarm problem at 15:42 EDT, but decided not
region),adjoiningsystems(suchasAEP),andcus-
to take such action because operators considered
tomers.TheFEoperatorsreceivedpertinentinfor-
power system conditions precarious, were con-
mation from all these sources, but did not
cerned about the length of time that the reboot
recognize the emerging problems from the clues
mighttaketocomplete,andunderstoodthatacold
offered.Thispertinentinformationincludedcalls
rebootwouldleavethemwithevenlessEMSfunc-
such as that from FE’s eastern control center ask-
tionality until it was completed.18
ing about possible line trips, FE Perry nuclear
Clues to the EMS Problems. There is an entry in plant calls regarding what looked like nearby line
FE’s western desk operator’s log at 14:14 EDT trips,AEPcallingabouttheirendoftheStar-South
referring to the loss of alarms, but it is not clear Canton line tripping, and
Recommendations
whetherthatentrywasmadeatthattimeorsubse- MISOandPJMcallingabout
19, page 156; 26, page 161
quently, referring back to the last known alarm. possible line overloads.
Thereisnoindicationthattheoperatormentioned
Without a functioning alarm system, the FE con-
theproblemtoothercontrol
Recommendation trol area operators failed to detect the tripping of
room staff and supervisors
26, page 161 electrical facilities essential to maintain the secu-
or to FE’s IT staff.
rity of their control area. Unaware of the loss of
ThefirstclearhinttoFEcontrolroomstaffofany alarmsandalimitedEMS,theymadenoalternate
computerproblemsoccurredat14:19EDTwhena arrangements to monitor the system. When AEP
caller and an FE control room operator discussed identifiedthe14:27EDTcircuittripandreclosure
the fact that three sub-transmission center of the Star 345 kV line circuit breakers at AEP’s
dial-ups had failed.19 At 14:25 EDT, a control South Canton substation, the FE operator dis-
room operator talked with a caller about the fail- missed the information as either not accurate or
ure of these three remote EMS consoles.20 The not relevant to his system, without following up
nexthintcameat14:32EDT,whenFEscheduling onthediscrepancybetweentheAEPeventandthe
staff spoke about having made schedule changes informationfromhisowntools.Therewasnosub-
to update the EMS pages, but that the totals did sequent verification of conditions with the MISO
not update.21 reliability coordinator.
AlthoughFE’sITstaffwouldhave Only after AEP notified FE that a 345-kV circuit
Cause 2
Inadequate been aware that concurrent loss had tripped and locked out did the FE control
Situational ofitsserverswouldmeantheloss area operator compare this information to
Awareness of alarm processing on the EMS, actual breaker conditions. FE failed to inform its
the investigation team has found reliability coordinator and adjacent control areas
noindicationthattheITstaffinformedthecontrol when they became aware that system conditions
56  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

had changed due to un- 3D) 15:35EDT:AEPaskedPJMtobeginworkona
Recommendations
scheduled equipment out- 26, page 161; 30, page 163 350-MW TLR to relieve overloading on the
ages that might affect other Star-South Canton line, not knowing the
control areas. Hanna-Juniper 345-kV line had already trip-
ped at 15:32 EDT.
Phase 3:
3E) 15:36 EDT: MISO called FE regarding
Three FE 345-kV post-contingency overload on Star-Juniper
345-kV line for the contingency loss of the
Transmission Line Failures
Hanna-Juniper 345-kV line, unaware at the
and Many Phone Calls:
start of the call that Hanna-Juniper had
15:05 EDT to 15:57 EDT already tripped.
3F) 15:41:33-41 EDT: Star-South Canton 345-kV
Overview of This Phase
tripped, reclosed, tripped again at 15:41:35
EDT and remained out of service, all while
From15:05:41EDTto15:41:35EDT,three345-kV
AEP and PJM were discussing TLR relief
lines failed with power flows at or below each
options (event 3D).
transmission line’s emergency rating. These line
tripswerenotrandom.Rather,eachwastheresult Transmissionlinesaredesignedwiththeexpecta-
of a contact between a line and a tree that tion that they will sag lower when they become
had grown so tall that, over a period of years, it hotter. The transmission line gets hotter with
encroached into the required clearance height for heavier line loading and under higher ambient
the line. As each line failed, its outage increased temperatures, so towers and conductors are
theloadingontheremaininglines(Figure5.5).As designed to be tall enough and conductors pulled
each of the transmission lines failed, and power tightly enough to accommodate expected sagging
flowsshiftedtoothertransmissionpaths,voltages and still meet safety requirements. On a summer
ontherestofFE’ssystemdegradedfurther(Figure day, conductor temperatures can rise from 60°C
5.6). onmorningswithaveragewindto100°Cwithhot
air temperatures and low wind conditions.
Key Phase 3 Events
A short-circuit occurred on the Harding-
3A) 15:05:41 EDT: Harding-Chamberlin 345-kV Chamberlin 345-kV line due to a contact between
line tripped. thelineconductorandatree.Thislinefailedwith
power flow at only 44% of its normal and emer-
3B) 15:31-33EDT:MISOcalledPJMtodetermine
gency line rating. Incremental line current and
if PJM had seen the Stuart-Atlanta 345-kV
temperature increases, escalated by the loss of
line outage. PJM confirmed Stuart-Atlanta
Harding-Chamberlin, caused more sag on the
was out.
Hanna-Juniper line, which contacted a tree and
3C) 15:32:03 EDT: Hanna-Juniper 345-kV line failed with power flow at 88% of its normal
tripped. and emergency line rating. Star-South Canton
Figure 5.6. Voltages on FirstEnergy’s 345-kV Lines:
Figure 5.5. FirstEnergy 345-kV Line Flows Impacts of Line Trips
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  57

Figure 5.7. Timeline Phase 3
contactedatreethreetimesbetween14:27:15EDT Likemosttransmissionowners,FEpatrolsitslines
and 15:41:33 EDT, opening and reclosing each regularly,flyingovereachtransmissionlinetwice
time before finally locking out while loaded at a year to check on the condition of the
93%ofitsemergencyratingat15:41:35EDT.Each rights-of-way. Notes from fly-overs in 2001 and
of these three lines tripped not because of exces- 2002indicatethattheexaminerssawasignificant
sivesagduetooverloadingorhighconductortem- numberoftreesandbrushthatneededclearingor
perature, but because it hit an overgrown,
untrimmed tree.22
Line Ratings
Overgrown trees, as opposed to
Cause 3 A conductor’s normal rating reflects how
excessive conductor sag, caused
Inadequate heavily the line can be loaded under routine
Tree each of these faults. While sag operation and keep its internal temperature
Trimming may have contributed to these
below a certain temperature (such as 90°C). A
events, these incidents occurred
conductor’s emergency rating is often set to
because the trees grew too tall and encroached
allow higher-than-normal power flows, but to
into the space below the line which is intended
limit its internal temperature to a maximum
to be clear of any objects, not because the lines
temperature(suchas100°C)fornolongerthana
sagged into short trees. Because the trees were so
specified period, so that it does not sag too low
tall (as discussed below), each of these lines
or cause excessive damage to the conductor.
faultedundersystemconditionswellwithinspec-
ifiedoperatingparameters.Theinvestigationteam For three of the four 345-kV lines that failed,
found field evidence of tree contact at all three FE set the normal and emergency ratings at the
locations, including human observation of the samelevel.ManyofFE’slinesarelimitedbythe
Hanna-Juniper contact. Evidence outlined below maximum temperature capability of its termi-
confirms that contact with trees caused the short nal equipment, rather than by the maximum
circuitstogroundthatcausedeachlinetotripout safetemperatureforitsconductors.Incalculat-
on August 14. ing summer emergency ampacity ratings for
manyofitslines,FEassumed90°F(32°C)ambi-
To be sure that the evidence of tree/line contacts
ent air temperatures and 6.3 ft/sec (1.9 m/sec)
and tree remains found at each site was linked to
wind speed,a which is a relatively high wind
the events of August 14, the team looked at
speed assumption for favorable wind cooling.
whether these lines had any prior history of out-
Actual temperature on August 14 was 87°F
agesinprecedingmonthsoryearsthatmighthave
(31°C)butwindspeedatcertainlocationsinthe
resulted in the burn marks, debarking, and other
Akron area was somewhere between 0 and 2
vegetative evidence of line contacts. The record
ft/sec(0.6m/sec)after15:00EDTthatafternoon.
establishesthattherewerenopriorsustainedout-
aFirstEnergyTransmissionPlanningCriteria(Revision8),
agesknowntobecausedbytreesfortheselinesin
