and shunt reactive devices are in service. All of
and shared as rapidly as it is collected. The data
these elements affect the system’s imped-
is passed between the control centers using an
ance—the physics of how and where power will
Inter-Control Center Communications Protocol
flowacrossthesystem.Topologyandimpedance
(ICCP), often over private frame relay networks.
are modeled in power-flow programs, state esti-
NERC operates one such network, known as
mators, and contingency analysis software used
NERCNet. ICCP data are used for minute-to-
to evaluate and manage the system.
minute operations to monitor system conditions
Topology processors are used as front-end pro- and control the system, and include items such
cessors for state estimators and operational dis- as line flows, voltages, generation levels, dy-
playandalarmsystems.Theyconvertthedigital namic interchange schedules, area control error
telemetryofbreakerandswitchstatustobeused (ACE), and system frequency, as well as in state
by state estimators, and for displays showing estimators and contingency analysis tools.
lines being opened or closed or reactive devices
IDC:Sincetheactualpowerflowsalongthepath
in or out of service.
ofleastresistanceinaccordancewiththelawsof
A variety of up-to-date information on the ele- physics,theNERCInterchange Distribution Cal-
ments of the system must be collected and culator (IDC) is used to determine where it will
exchanged for modeled topology to be accurate actually flow. The IDC is a computer software
in real time. If data on the condition of system packagethatcalculatestheimpactsofexistingor
elements are incorrect, a state estimator will not proposed power transfers on the transmission
successfully solve or converge because the components of the Eastern Interconnection. The
real-worldlineflowsandvoltagesbeingreported IDCusesapowerflowmodeloftheinterconnec-
will disagree with the modeled solution. tion, representing over 40,000 substation buses,
55,000 lines and transformers, and more than
DataNeeded:Avarietyofoperationaldataiscol-
6,000 generators. This model calculates transfer
lectedandexchangedbetweencontrolareasand
distribution factors (TDFs), which tell how a
reliabilitycoordinatorstomonitorsystemperfor-
power transfer would load up each system
mance,conductreliabilityanalyses,managecon-
gestion, and perform energy accounting. The (continued on page 51)
50  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

Phase 2: that was hosting the alarm function, and then the
backup server such that all functions that were
FE’s Computer Failures:
being supported on these servers were stopped at
14:14 EDT to 15:59 EDT 14:54 EDT. However, for over an hour no one in
FE’scontrolroomgraspedthattheircomputersys-
Overview of This Phase tems were not operating properly, even though
FE’s Information Technology support staff knew
Starting around 14:14 EDT, FE’s control room of the problems and were working to solve them,
operators lost the alarm function that provided and the absence of alarms and other symptoms
audible and visual indications when a significant offered many clues to the operators of the EMS
pieceofequipmentchangedfromanacceptableto system’simpairedstate.Thus,withoutafunction-
a problematic condition. Shortly thereafter, the ing EMS or the knowledge that it had failed, FE’s
EMS system lost a number of its remote control system operators remained unaware that their
consoles.Nextitlosttheprimaryservercomputer electrical system condition was beginning to
Data Exchanged for Operational Reliability (Continued)
element, and outage transfer distribution factors determination of available transmission capabil-
(OTDFs), which tell how much power would be ity (ATC).
transferred to a system element if another spe-
E-Tags:Allinter-controlareapowertransfersare
cific system element were lost.
electronically tagged (E-Tag) with critical infor-
The IDC model is updated through the NERC mation for use in reliability coordination and
System Data Exchange (SDX) system to reflect congestion management systems, particularly
lineoutages,loadlevels,andgenerationoutages. the IDC in the Eastern Interconnection. The
Power transfer information is input to the IDC Western Interconnection also exchanges tagging
through the NERC electronic tagging (E-Tag) information for reliability coordination and use
system. in its unscheduled flow mitigation system. An
E-Tag includes information about the size of the
SDX: The IDC depends on element status infor- transfer, when it starts and stops, where it starts
mation, exchanged over the NERC System Data andends,andthetransmissionserviceproviders
Exchange (SDX) system, to keep the system alongitsentirecontractpath,theprioritiesofthe
topology current in its powerflow model of the transmission service being used, and other
Eastern Interconnection. The SDX distributes pertinent details of the transaction. More than
generation and transmission outage information 100,000 E-Tags are exchanged every month,
toalloperators,aswellasdemandandoperating representingabout100,000GWhoftransactions.
reserve projections for the next 48 hours. These The information in the E-Tags is used to facili-
data are used to update the IDC model, which is tate curtailments as needed for congestion
used to calculate the impact of power transfers management.
across the system on individual transmission
Voice Communications: Voice communication
system elements. There is no current require-
between control area operators and reliability is
ment for how quickly asset owners must report
an essential part of exchanging operational data.
changesinelementstatus(suchasalineoutage)
When telemetry or electronic communications
totheSDX—someentitiesupdateitwithfacility
fail,someessentialdatavalueshavetobemanu-
status only once a day, while others submit new
ally entered into SCADA systems, state estima-
information immediately after an event occurs.
tors,energyschedulingandaccountingsoftware,
NERCisnowdevelopingarequirementforregu-
and contingency analysis systems. Direct voice
lar information update submittals that is sched-
contact between operators enables them to
uled to take effect in the summer of 2004.
replace key data with readings from the other
SDX data are used by some control centers to systems’telemetry,orsurmisewhatanappropri-
keep their topology up-to-date for areas of the ate value for manual replacement should be.
interconnection that are not observable through Also, when operators see spurious readings or
directtelemetryorICCPdata.Anumberoftrans- suspicious flows, direct discussions with neigh-
mission providers also use these data to update boring control centers can help avert problems
their transmission models for short-term like those experienced on August 14, 2003.
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  51

Figure 5.4. Timeline Phase 2
degrade. Unknowingly, they used the outdated after voltages had begun deteriorating but well
systemconditioninformationtheydidhavetodis- beforeanyofFE’slinesbegantocontacttreesand
countinformationfromothersaboutgrowingsys- trip out. After that time, the FE control room con-
tem problems. solesdidnotreceiveanyfurtheralarms,norwere
there any alarms being printed or posted on the
Key Events in This Phase
EMS’salarmloggingfacilities.Powersystemoper-
2A) 14:14 EDT: FE alarm and logging software ators rely heavily on audible and on-screen
failed. Neither FE’s control room operators alarms, plus alarm logs, to reveal any significant
nor FE’s IT EMS support personnel were changes in their system’s conditions. After 14:14
aware of the alarm failure. EDT on August 14, FE’s operators were working
under a significant handicap without these tools.
2B) 14:20 EDT: Several FE remote EMS consoles However, they were in further jeopardy because
failed.FE’sInformationTechnology(IT)engi- they did not know that they were operating with-
neer was computer auto-paged. outalarms,sothattheydidnotrealizethatsystem
conditions were changing.
2C) 14:27:16 EDT: Star-South Canton 345-kV
transmission line tripped and successfully Alarms are a critical function of an EMS, and
reclosed. EMS-generatedalarmsarethefundamentalmeans
by which system operators identify events on the
2D) 14:32EDT:AEPcalledFEcontrolroomabout
power system that need their attention. Without
AEP indication of Star-South Canton 345-kV
alarms, events indicating one or more significant
linetripandreclosure.FEhadnoalarmorlog
system changes can occur but remain undetected
of this line trip.
bytheoperator.IfanEMS’salarmsareabsent,but
2E) 14:41 EDT: The primary FE control system operators are aware of the situation and the
server hosting the alarm function failed. Its remainder of the EMS’s functions are intact, the
applications and functions were passed over operatorscanpotentiallycontinuetousetheEMS
to a backup computer. FE’s IT engineer was tomonitorandexercisecontroloftheirpowersys-
auto-paged. tem. In such circumstances, the operators would
have to do so via repetitive, continuous manual
2F) 14:54 EDT: The FE back-up computer failed
scanning of numerous data and status points
and all functions that were running on it
located within the multitude of individual dis-
stopped. FE’s IT engineer was auto-paged.
plays available within their EMS. Further, it
Failure of FE’s Alarm System would be difficult for the operator to identify
quickly the most relevant of the many screens
Cause 2 FE’s computer SCADA alarm and available.
Inadequate logging software failed sometime
Situational shortly after 14:14 EDT (the last In the same way that an alarm system can inform
Awareness
time that a valid alarm came in), operators about the failure of key grid facilities, it
52  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

can also be set up to alarm them if the alarm sys- receiving. Continuing on in the belief that their
tem itself fails to perform properly. FE’s EMS did system was satisfactory, lacking any alarms from
not have such a notification system. their EMS to the contrary, and without visualiza-
tionaidssuchasadynamicmapboardoraprojec-
Although the alarm processing function of FE’s
tionofsystemtopology,FEcontrolroomoperators
EMSfailed,theremainderofthatsystemgenerally
were subsequently surprised when they began
continued to collect valid real-time status infor-
receivingtelephonecallsfromotherlocationsand
mation and measurements about FE’s power sys-
information sources—MISO, AEP, PJM, and FE
tem, and continued to have supervisory control
fieldoperationsstaff—whoofferedinformationon
over the FE system. The EMS also continued to
the status of FE’s transmission facilities that con-
send its normal and expected collection of infor-
flicted with FE’s system
mationontoothermonitoringpointsandauthori- Recommendations
operators’ understanding of 3, page 143, 22, page 159
ties,includingMISOandAEP.Thustheseentities
the situation.
continued to receive accurate information about
thestatusandconditionofFE’spowersystemafter Analysis of the alarm problem performed by FE
thetimewhenFE’sEMSalarmsfailed.FE’sopera- suggests that the alarm process essentially
tors were unaware that in this situation they “stalled” while processing an alarm event, such
neededtomanuallyandmorecloselymonitorand that the process began to run in a manner that
interpret the SCADA information they were failed to complete the processing of that alarm or
Alarms
Systemoperatorsmustkeepacloseandconstant “closed” (off or on) when they should be other-
watch on the multitude of things occurring wise, or whether they have changed condition
simultaneously on their power system. These sincethelastscan.Thesealarmsshouldprovide
include the system’s load, the generation and clearindicationandnotificationtosystemopera-
supply resources to meet that load, available torsofwhetheragivendeviceisdoingwhatthey
reserves, and measurements of critical power think it is, or what they want it to do—for
system states, such as the voltage levels on the instance, whether a given power line is con-
lines. Because it is not humanly possible to nectedtothesystemandmovingpoweratapar-
watch and understand all these events and con- ticular moment.
ditions simultaneously, Energy Management
Systemsusealarmstobringrelevantinformation EMS limit alarms are designed to provide an
to operators’ attention. The alarms draw on the indication to system operators when something
information collected by the SCADA real-time important that is measured on a power system
monitoring system. device—such as the voltage on a line or the
amount of power flowing across it—is below or
Alarms are designed to quickly and appropri-
above pre-specified limits for using that device
ately attract the power system operators’ atten-
safely and efficiently. When a limit alarm acti-
tion to events or developments of interest on the
vates, it provides an important early warning to
system. They do so using combinations of audi-
the power system operator that elements of the
ble and visual signals, such as sounds at opera-
system may need some adjustment to prevent
tors’ control desks and symbol or color changes
damage to the system or to customer loads—like
or animations on system monitors, displays, or
the “low fuel” or “high engine temperature”
map boards. EMS alarms for power systems are
warnings in a car.
similar to the indicator lights or warning bell
tonesthatamodernautomobileusestosignalits
When FE’s alarm system failed on August 14, its
driver, like the “door open” bell, an image of a
operatorswererunningacomplexpowersystem
headlight high beam, a “parking brake on” indi-
without adequate indicators of when key ele-
cator,andthevisualandaudiblealertwhenagas
ments of that system were reaching and passing
tank is almost empty.
thelimitsofsafeoperation—andwithoutaware-
Powersystems,likecars,use“status”alarmsand ness that they were running the system without
“limit” alarms. A status alarm indicates the state these alarms and should no longer assume that
of a monitored device. In power systems these not getting alarms meant that system conditions
are commonly used to indicate whether such were still safe and unchanging.
items as switches or breakers are “open” or
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  53

produce any other valid output (alarms). In the operators’ computer consoles. Thus at times on
meantime, new inputs—system condition data August 14th, operators’ screen refresh rates—the
that needed to be reviewed for possible rate at which new information and displays are
alarms—built up in and then overflowed the pro- paintedontothecomputerscreen,normally1to3
cess’ input buffers.9,10 seconds—slowed to as long as 59 seconds per
screen. Since FE operators have numerous infor-
Loss of Remote EMS Terminals. Between 14:20
mation screen options, and one or more screens
EDTand14:25EDT,someofFE’sremoteEMSter-
are commonly “nested” as sub-screens to one or
minals in substations ceased operation. FE has
more top level screens, operators’ ability to view,
advisedtheinvestigationteamthatitbelievesthis
understand and operate their system through the
occurred because the data feeding into those ter-
EMS would have slowed to a frustrating crawl.13
minals started “queuing” and overloading the ter-
This situation may have occurred between 14:54
minals’ buffers. FE’s system operators did not
EDTand15:08EDTwhenbothserversfailed,and
learn about this failure until 14:36 EDT, when a
again between 15:46 EDT and 15:59 EDT while
technician at one of the sites noticed the terminal
FE’sITpersonnelattemptedtorebootbothservers
was not working after he came in on the 15:00
to remedy the alarm problem.
shift, and called the main control room to report
theproblem.Asremoteterminalsfailed,eachtrig- Loss of the first server caused an auto-page to be
geredanautomaticpagetoFE’sInformationTech- issued to alert FE’s EMS IT support personnel to
nology(IT)staff.11Theinvestigationteamhasnot the problem. When the back-up server failed, it
determined why some terminals failed whereas toosentanauto-pagetoFE’sITstaff.Theydidnot
othersdidnot.Transcriptsindicatethatdatalinks notify control room operators of the problem. At
to the remote sites were down as well.12 15:08EDT,ITstafferscompleteda“warmreboot”
(restart)oftheprimaryserver.Startupdiagnostics
EMS Server Failures. FE’s EMS system includes
monitored during that reboot verified that the
severalservernodesthatperformthehigherfunc-
computer and all expected processes were run-
tions of the EMS. Although any one of them can
ning; accordingly, FE’s IT staff believed that they
host all of the functions, FE’s normal system con-
had successfully restarted the node and all the
figuration is to have a number of host subsets of
processes it was hosting. However, although the
the applications, with one server remaining in a
serveranditsapplicationswereagainrunning,the
“hot-standby” mode as a backup to the others
alarm system remained frozen and non-func-
should any fail. At 14:41 EDT, the primary server
tional,evenontherestartedcomputer.TheITstaff
hosting the EMS alarm processing application
did not confirm that the
