  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations   189

Fernandez, Rick Personal comment
Fidrych, Mark Western Area Power Authority (WAPA) and Chairman of the NERC Operating Committee
Furuya, Toshihiko Tokyo Electric Power Co., Inc.
Galatic, Alex Personal comment
Garg, Ajay Hydro One Networks Inc.
Goffin, Dave Canadian Chemical Producers Assocation
Gruber, William M. Ondrey Attorney
Guimond, Pierre Canadian Nuclear Association
Gurdziel, Tom Personal comment
Hakobyan, Spartak and
Personal comment
Gurgen
Han, Masur Personal comment
Hauser, Carl School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Washington State University
Hebert, Larry Thunder Bay Hydro
Hilt, Dave NERC
Hughes, John P. ELCON
Imai, Shinichi Tokyo Electric Power
Jeyapalan, Jey K. Jeyapalan & Associates, LLC
Johnston, Sidney A. Personal comment
Kane, Michael Personal comment
Katsuras, George Independent Electric Market Operator of Ontario
Kellat, Stephen Personal comment
Kerr, Jack Dominion Virginia Power
Kerr, Jack Best Real-time Reliability Analysis Practices Task Force
Kershaw, Raymond K. International Transmission Company
Kolodziej, Eddie Personal comment
Konow, Hans Canadian Electricity Association
Kormos, Mike PJM
Kucey, Tim National Energy Board (Canada)
Laugier, Alexandre Personal comment
Lawson, Barry National Rural Electric Cooperative Association
Lazarewicz, Matthew L. Beacon Power Corp.
Lee, Stephen Electric Power Research Institute
Leovy, Steve Personal comment
Linda Campbell Florida Reliability Coordinating Council
Loehr, G.C. Power Engineers Seeking Truth
Love, Peter Canadian Energy Efficiency Alliance
Macedo, Frank Hydro One
Maliszewski, R.M. Power Engineers Seeking Truth
McMonagle, Rob Canadian Solar Industries Assocation
Meissner, Joseph Personal comment
190   U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  

Middlestadt, Bill Bonneville Power Administration
CuyahogaCountyBoardofCommissioners,andmember,CommunityAdvisoryPanel;panelcre-
Milter, Carolyn
ated for Cleveland Electric Illuminating Co. (later First Energy)
Mitchell, Terry Excel Energy
Moore, Scott AEP
Murphy, Paul IMO Ontario
Museler, William J. New York Independent System Operator
O’Keefe, Brian Canadian Union of Public Employees
Oliver, Fiona Canadian Energy Efficiency Alliance
Ormund, Peter Mohawk College
Pennstone, Mike Hydro One
Pereira, Les Personal comment
Phillips, Margie Pennsylvania Services Integration Consortium
Rocha, Paul X. CenterPoint Energy
Ross, Don Prince Edward Island Wind Co-Op
Rupp, Douglas B Ada Core Technologies, Inc.
Sasson, Mayer New York State Reliability Council
Schwerdt, Ed Northeast Power Coordinating Council
Seppa, Tapani O. The Valley Group, Inc.,
Silverstein, Alison Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
Spears, J. Personal comment
Spencer, Sidney Personal comment
spider Personal comment
Staniford, Stuart Personal comment
Stephens, Eric B. Ohio Consumers’ Counsel (OCC)
Stewart, Bob PG&E
Synesiou, John IMS Corporation
Tarler, Howard A. On behalf of Chairman William M. Flynn, New York State Department of Public Service
Tatro, Phil National Grid Company
Taylor, Carson Bonneville Power Administration
van Welie, Gordon ISO New England Inc.
Van Zandt, Vickie Bonneville Power Administration
Warren, Kim IMO Ontario
Watkins, Don Bonneville Power Administration
Wells, Chuck OSISoft
Wiedman, Tom ConEd
Wightman, Donald Utility Workers Union of America
Wilson, John Personal comment
Winter, Chris Conservation Council of Ontario
Wright, C. Dortch On behalf of New Jersey Governor James E. McGreevey
Zwergel, Dave Midwest ISO
  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations   191



Appendix D
NERC Actions to Prevent and Mitigate the Impacts
of Future Cascading Blackouts
Preamble
The Board of Trustees recognizes the paramount importance of a reliable bulk electric system in
North America. In consideration of the findings of the investigation into the August 14, 2003
blackout, NERC must take firm and immediate actions to increase public confidence that the
reliability of the North American bulk electric system is being protected.
A key finding of the blackout investigators is that violations of existing NERC reliability standards
contributed directly to the blackout. Pending enactment of federal reliability legislation creating a
framework for enforcement of mandatory reliability standards, and with the encouragement of the
Stakeholders Committee, the board is determined to obtain full compliance with all existing and
future reliability standards and intends to use all legitimate means available to achieve that end. The
board therefore resolves to:
• Receive specific information on all violations of NERC standards, including the identities of
the parties involved;
• Take firm actions to improve compliance with NERC reliability standards;
• Provide greater transparency to violations of standards, while respecting the confidential
nature of some information and the need for a fair and deliberate due process; and
• Inform and work closely with the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission and other
applicable federal, state, and provincial regulatory authorities in the United States, Canada,
and Mexico as needed to ensure public interests are met with respect to compliance with
reliability standards.
The board expresses its appreciation to the blackout investigators and the Steering Group for their
objective and thorough work in preparing a report of recommended NERC actions. With a few
clarifications, the board approves the report and directs implementation of the recommended actions.
The board holds the assigned committees and organizations accountable to report to the board the
progress in completing the recommended actions, and intends itself to publicly report those results.
The board recognizes the possibility that this action plan may have to be adapted as additional
analysis is completed, but stresses the need to move forward immediately with the actions as stated.
Furthermore, the board directs management to immediately advise the board of any significant
violations of NERC reliability standards, including details regarding the nature and potential
reliability impacts of the alleged violations and the identity of parties involved. Management shall
supply to the board in advance of board meetings a detailed report of all violations of reliability
standards.
Finally, the board resolves to form a task force to develop guidelines for the board to consider with
regard to the confidentiality of compliance information and disclosure of such information to
regulatory authorities and the public.
Approved by the Board of Trustees 1
February 10, 2004
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  193

Overview of Investigation Conclusions
The North American Electric Reliability Council (NERC) has conducted a comprehensive
investigation of the August 14, 2003 blackout. The results of NERC’s investigation contributed
significantly to the U.S./Canada Power System Outage Task Force’s November 19, 2003 Interim
Report identifying the root causes of the outage and the sequence of events leading to and during the
cascading failure. NERC fully concurs with the conclusions of the Interim Report and continues to
provide its support to the Task Force through ongoing technical analysis of the outage. Although an
understanding of what happened and why has been resolved for most aspects of the outage, detailed
analysis continues in several areas, notably dynamic simulations of the transient phases of the
cascade and a final verification of the full scope of all violations of NERC and regional reliability
standards that occurred leading to the outage.
From its investigation of the August 14 blackout, NERC concludes that:
• Several entities violated NERC operating policies and planning standards, and those
violations contributed directly to the start of the cascading blackout.
• The existing process for monitoring and assuring compliance with NERC and regional
reliability standards was shown to be inadequate to identify and resolve specific compliance
violations before those violations led to a cascading blackout.
• Reliability coordinators and control areas have adopted differing interpretations of the
functions, responsibilities, authorities, and capabilities needed to operate a reliable power
system.
• Problems identified in studies of prior large-scale blackouts were repeated, including
deficiencies in vegetation management, operator training, and tools to help operators better
visualize system conditions.
• In some regions, data used to model loads and generators were inaccurate due to a lack of
verification through benchmarking with actual system data and field testing.
• Planning studies, design assumptions, and facilities ratings were not consistently shared and
were not subject to adequate peer review among operating entities and regions.
• Available system protection technologies were not consistently applied to optimize the ability
to slow or stop an uncontrolled cascading failure of the power system.
Approved by the Board of Trustees 2
February 10, 2004
194  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

Overview of Recommendations
The Board of Trustees approves the NERC Steering Group recommendations to address these
shortcomings. The recommendations fall into three categories.
Actions to Remedy Specific Deficiencies: Specific actions directed to First Energy (FE), the
Midwest Independent System Operator (MISO), and the PJM Interconnection, LLC (PJM) to correct
the deficiencies that led to the blackout.
1. Correct the Direct Causes of the August 14, 2003 Blackout.
Strategic Initiatives: Strategic initiatives by NERC and the regional reliability councils to strengthen
compliance with existing standards and to formally track completion of recommended actions from
August 14, and other significant power system events.
2. Strengthen the NERC Compliance Enforcement Program.
3. Initiate Control Area and Reliability Coordinator Reliability Readiness Audits.
4. Evaluate Vegetation Management Procedures and Results.
5. Establish a Program to Track Implementation of Recommendations.
Technical Initiatives: Technical initiatives to prevent or mitigate the impacts of future cascading
blackouts.
6. Improve Operator and Reliability Coordinator Training
7. Evaluate Reactive Power and Voltage Control Practices.
8. Improve System Protection to Slow or Limit the Spread of Future Cascading Outages.
9. Clarify Reliability Coordinator and Control Area Functions, Responsibilities, Capabilities
and Authorities.
10. Establish Guidelines for Real-Time Operating Tools.
11. Evaluate Lessons Learned During System Restoration.
12. Install Additional Time-Synchronized Recording Devices as Needed.
13. Reevaluate System Design, Planning and Operating Criteria.
14. Improve System Modeling Data and Data Exchange Practices.
Market Impacts
Many of the recommendations in this report have implications for electricity markets and market
participants, particularly those requiring reevaluation or clarification of NERC and regional
standards, policies and criteria. Implicit in these recommendations is that the NERC board charges
the Market Committee with assisting in the implementation of the recommendations and interfacing
with the North American Energy Standards Board with respect to any necessary business practices.
Approved by the Board of Trustees 3
February 10, 2004
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  195

Recommendation to Remedy Specific Deficiencies
Recommendation 1. Correct the Direct Causes of the August 14, 2003 Blackout.
NERC’s technical analysis of the August 14 blackout leads it to fully concur with the Task Force
Interim Report regarding the direct causes of the blackout. The report stated that the principal causes
of the blackout were that FE did not maintain situational awareness of conditions on its power system
and did not adequately manage tree growth in its transmission rights-of-way. Contributing factors
included ineffective diagnostic support provided by MISO as the reliability coordinator for FE and
ineffective communications between MISO and PJM.
NERC will take immediate and firm actions to ensure that the same deficiencies that were directly
causal to the August 14 blackout are corrected. These steps are necessary to assure electricity
customers, regulators and others with an interest in the reliable delivery of electricity that the power
system is being operated in a manner that is safe and reliable, and that the specific causes of the
August 14 blackout have been identified and fixed.
Recommendation 1a: FE, MISO, and PJM shall each complete the remedial actions designated
in Attachment A for their respective organizations and certify to the NERC board no later than
June 30, 2004, that these specified actions have been completed. Furthermore, each
organization shall present its detailed plan for completing these actions to the NERC
committees for technical review on March 23-24, 2004, and to the NERC board for approval no
later than April 2, 2004.
Recommendation 1b: The NERC Technical Steering Committee shall immediately assign a
team of experts to assist FE, MISO, and PJM in developing plans that adequately address the
issues listed in Attachment A, and other remedial actions for which each entity may seek
technical assistance.
Approved by the Board of Trustees 4
February 10, 2004
196  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

Strategic Initiatives to
Assure Compliance with Reliability Standards and to Track Recommendations
Recommendation 2. Strengthen the NERC Compliance Enforcement Program.
NERC’s analysis of the actions and events leading to the
August 14 blackout leads it to conclude that several Violations of NERC standards identified in
violations of NERC operating policies contributed directly the November 19, 2003 Interim Report:
to an uncontrolled, cascading outage on the Eastern 1. Following the outage of the Chamberlin-
Interconnection. NERC continues to investigate additional Harding 345 kV line, FE did not take the
necessary actions to return the system to
violations of NERC and regional reliability standards and
a safe operating state within 30 minutes
expects to issue a final report of those violations in March
(violation of NERC Operating Policy 2).
2004.
2. FE did not notify other systems of an
impending system emergency (violation
In the absence of enabling legislation in the United States of NERC Operating Policy 5).
and complementary actions in Canada and Mexico to 3. FE’s analysis tools were not used to
authorize the creation of an electric reliability organization, effectively assess system conditions
(violation of NERC Operating Policy 5).
NERC lacks legally sanctioned authority to enforce
4. FE operator training was inadequate for
compliance with its reliability rules. However, the August
maintaining reliable conditions (violation
14 blackout is a clear signal that voluntary compliance with
of NERC Operating Policy 8).
reliability rules is no longer adequate. NERC and the 5. MISO did not notify other reliability
regional reliability councils must assume firm authority to coordinators of potential problems
measure compliance, to more transparently report (violation of NERC Operating Policy 9).
significant violations that could risk the integrity of the
interconnected power system, and to take immediate and
effective actions to ensure that such violations are corrected.
Recommendation 2a: Each regional reliability council shall report to the NERC Compliance
Enforcement Program within one month of occurrence all significant1 violations of NERC
operating policies and planning standards and regional standards, whether verified or still
under investigation. Such reports shall confidentially note details regarding the nature and
potential reliability impacts of the alleged violations and the identity of parties involved.
Additionally, each regional reliability council shall report quarterly to NERC, in a format
prescribed by NERC, all violations of NERC and regional reliability council standards.
Recommendation 2b: Being presented with the results of the investigation of any significant
violation, and with due consideration of the surrounding facts and circumstances, the NERC
board shall require an offending organization to correct the violation within a specified time. If
the board determines that an offending organization is non-responsive and continues to cause a
risk to the reliability of the interconnected power systems, the board will seek to remedy the
violation by requesting assistance of the appropriate regulatory authorities in the United States,
Canada, and Mexico.
1 Although all violations are important, a significant violation is one that could directly reduce the integrity of the
interconnected power systems or otherwise cause unfavorable risk to the interconnected power systems. By contrast, a
violation of a reporting or administrative requirement would not by itself generally be considered a significant violation.
Approved by the Board of Trustees 5
February 10, 2004
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  197

Recommendation 2c: The Planning and Operating Committees, working in conjunction with
the Compliance Enforcement Program, shall review and update existing approved and draft
compliance templates applicable to current NERC operating policies and planning standards;
and submit any revisions or new templates to the board for approval no later than March 31,
2004. To expedite this task, the NERC President shall immediately form a Compliance
Template Task Force comprised of representatives of each committee. The Compliance
