whetherverifiedorstillunderinvestigationby
ties in Canada, and to the public.
the regional council. (A “significant violation”
isonethatcoulddirectlyreducetheintegrityof
D. Compliance Audits
theinterconnectedpowersystemsorotherwise
NERC:
cause unfavorable risk to the interconnected
Establishedplansfortwotypesofaudits,com-
power systems.) In addition, each regional
pliance audits and readiness audits. Compli-
councilistoreportquarterlytoNERC,inafor-
anceauditswoulddeterminewhetherthesub-
mat prescribed by NERC, all violations of
ject entity is in documented compliance with
NERC and regional reliability standards.
NERC standards, policies, etc. Readiness au-
Task Force: ditsfocusonwhethertheentityisfunctionally
Recommends that NERC require the regional capableofmeetingthetermsofitsreliabilityre-
councils’quarterlyreportsandreportsonsig- sponsibilities. Under the terms approved by
nificant violations be filed as public docu- NERC’s Board, the readiness audits to be com-
mentswithFERCandappropriateauthorities pleted by June 30, 2004, will be conducted us-
inCanada,atthesametimethattheyaresent ing existing NERC rules, policies, standards,
to NERC. and NERC compliance templates. Require-
mentsforcontrolareaswillbebasedontheex-
B. Enforcement Action by NERC Board isting NERC Control Area Certification Proce-
NERC: dure, and updated as new criteria are ap-
Afterbeingpresentedwiththeresultsofthein- proved.
vestigationofasignificantviolation,theBoard Task Force:
is to require an offending organization to cor- Supports the NERC effort to verify that all
recttheviolationwithinaspecifiedtime.Ifthe entities are compliant with reliability stan-
Board determines that the organization is dards.Effectivecomplianceandauditingwill
non-responsiveandcontinuestocauseariskto require that the NERC standards be im-
thereliabilityoftheinterconnectedpowersys- proved rapidly to make them clear, unambig-
tems, the Board will seek to remedy the viola- uous, measurable, and consistent with the
tion by requesting assistance from appropriate Functional Model.
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  155

E. Audit Standards and Composition of Audit A. Readiness Audits
Teams
NERC:
NERC: InitsdirectivesofFebruary10,2004,NERCin-
UnderthetermsapprovedbytheBoard,there- dicatedthatitandtheregionalcouncilswould
gional councils are to have primary responsi- jointlyestablishaprogramtoauditthereliabil-
bility for conducting the compliance audits, ity readiness of all reliability coordinators and
under the oversight and direct participation of controlareaswithinthreeyearsandcontinuing
staff from the NERC Compliance Enforcement thereafteronathree-yearcycle.Twentyaudits
Program. FERC and other relevant regulatory ofhigh-priorityareaswillbecompletedbyJune
agencieswillbeinvitedtoparticipateintheau- 30, 2004, with particular attention to deficien-
dits, subject to the same confidentiality condi- cies identified in the investigation of the Au-
tions as the other team members. gust 14 blackout.
Task Force: Task Force:
Recommends that each team should have Recommends that the remainder of the first
somememberswhoareelectricreliabilityex- round of audits be completed within two
pertsfromoutsidetheregioninwhichtheau- years, as compared to NERC’s plan for three
dit is occurring. Also, some team members years.
should be from outside the electricity indus-
try, i.e., individuals with experience in sys- B. Public Release of Readiness Audit Reports
tems engineering and management, such as
Task Force:
persons from the nuclear power industry, the
RecommendsthatNERCrequireallreadiness
U.S. Navy, the aerospace industry, air traffic
audit reports to be publicly posted, excluding
control, or other relevant industries or gov-
portions pertaining to physical and cyber se-
ernment agencies. To improve the objectivity
curity. Reports should also be sent directly to
and consistency of investigation and perfor-
DOE, FERC, and relevant authorities in Can-
mance, NERC-organized teams should con-
ada and state commissions. Such reports
ductthesecomplianceaudits,usingNERCcri-
should draw clear distinctions between seri-
teria (with regional variations if more strin-
ous and minor violations of reliability stan-
gent), as opposed to the regional councils us-
dards or related requirements.
ing regionally developed criteria.
F. Public Release of Compliance Audit Reports 19. Improve near-term and long-term
training and certification requirements
Task Force:
for operators, reliability coordinators,
Recommends that NERC require all compli-
ance audit reports to be publicly posted, ex- and operator support staff.26
cluding portions pertaining to physical and
InitsrequirementsofFebruary10,2004,NERC
cyber security according to predetermined
directedthatallreliabilitycoordinators,control
criteria. Such reports should draw clear dis- areas,andtransmissionoperatorsaretoprovideat
tinctions between serious and minor viola- leastfivedaysperyearoftraininganddrillsin
tions of reliability standards or related re- systememergencies,usingrealisticsimulations,for
quirements. eachstaffpersonwithresponsibilityforthe
real-timeoperationorreliabilitymonitoringofthe
bulkelectricsystem.Thissystememergencytrain-
18. Support and strengthen NERC’s Reli- ingisinadditiontoothertrainingrequirements.
ability Readiness Audit Program.25 Fivedaysofsystememergencytraininganddrills
aretobecompletedbyJune30,2004.
OnFebruary10,2004,theNERCBoardofTrustees
approvedtheestablishmentofaNERCprogramfor TheTaskForcesupportsthesenear-termrequire-
periodicreviewsofthereliabilityreadinessofall mentsstrongly.Forthelongterm,theTaskForce
reliabilitycoordinatorsandcontrolareas.The recommendsthat:
TaskForcestronglysupportsthisaction,andrec-
A. NERCshouldrequiretrainingfortheplanning
ommendscertainadditionalmeasures,as
staffatcontrolareasandreliabilitycoordina-
describedbelow.
torsconcerningpowersystemcharacteristics
156  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

andload,VAr,andvoltagelimits,toenable NERC’s near-term requirements for emergency
themtodeveloprulesforoperatingstafftofol- preparednesstrainingaredescribedabove.Forthe
low. longterm,trainingforsystememergenciesshould
B. NERCshouldrequirecontrolareasandreliabil- be fully integrated into the broader training pro-
itycoordinatorstotraingridoperators,ITsup- grams required for all system planners, system
portpersonnel,andtheirsupervisorsto operators, their supervisors, and other control
recognizeandrespondtoabnormalautomation room support staff.
systemactivity.
Advisory Report by Independent Panel on
C. NERCshouldcommissionanadvisoryreportby
Industry Training Programs and Certification
anindependentpaneltoaddressawiderange
Requirements
ofissuesconcerningreliabilitytrainingpro-
gramsandcertificationrequirements. Under the oversight of FERC and appropriate
The Task Force investigation team found that Canadianauthorities,theTaskForcerecommends
some reliability coordinators and control area that NERC commission an independent advisory
operators had not received adequate training in panel of experts to design and propose minimum
recognizing and responding to system emergen- trainingprogramsandcertificationproceduresfor
cies.Mostnotablewasthelackofrealisticsimula- the industry’s control room managers and staff.
tionsanddrillstotrainandverifythecapabilities This panel should be comprised of experts from
of operating personnel. Such simulations are electric industry organizations with outstanding
essentialifoperatorsandotherstaffaretobeable training programs, universities, and other indus-
to respond adequately to emergencies. This train- tries that operate large safety or reliability-
ing deficiency contributed to the lack of situa- oriented systems and training programs. (The
tional awareness and failure to declare an Institute of Nuclear Power Operations (INPO), for
emergencyonAugust14whileoperatorinterven- example, provides training and other safety-
tion was still possible (before events began to relatedservicestooperatorsofU.S.nuclearpower
occur at a speed beyond human control). plants and plants in other countries.) The panel’s
reportshouldprovideguidanceonissuessuchas:
Control rooms must remain functional under a
wide range of possible conditions. Any person 1.Content of programs for new trainees
withaccesstoacontrolroomshouldbetrainedso
2.Content of programs for existing operators and
that he or she understands the basic functions of
other categories of employees
thecontrolroom,andhisorherroleinrelationto
those of others in the room under any conditions. 3.Content of continuing education programs and
Information technology (IT) staff, in particular, fraction of employee time to be committed to
shouldhaveadetailedunderstandingoftheinfor- ongoing training
mation needs of the system operators under alter-
4.Going beyond paper-based, fact-oriented
native conditions.
“knowledge” requirements for operators—i.e.,
The Task Force’s cyber investigation team noted confirming that an individual has the ability to
in its site visits an increasing reliance by control cope with unforeseen situations and
areas and utilities on automated systems to mea- emergencies
sure,reporton,andchangeawidevarietyofphys-
icalprocessesassociatedwithutilityoperations.27 5.In-house training vs. training by independent
If anything, this trend is likely to intensify in the parties
future. These systems enable the achievement of
6.Periodic accreditation of training programs
major operational efficiencies, but their failure
could cause or contribute to blackouts, as evi- 7.Who should certify trained staff?
denced by the alarm failures at FirstEnergy and
8.Criteria to establish grades or levels of operator
the state estimator deactivation at MISO.
qualifications from entry level to supervisor or
Gridoperatorsshouldbetrainedtorecognizeand manager, based on education, training, and
respond more efficiently to security and automa- experience.
tion problems, reinforced through the use of peri-
odic exercises. Likewise, IT support personnel The panel’s report should be delivered by March
should be better trained to understand and 31, 2005. FERC and Canadian authorities, in con-
respondtotherequirementsofgridoperatorsdur- sultation with NERC and others, should evaluate
ing security and IT incidents. the report and consider its findings in setting
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  157

minimum training and certification requirements needed, between “normal” and “emergency.” In
for control areas and reliability coordinators. someareas(e.g.,NPCC)an“alert”statehasalready
been established.
20. Establish clear definitions for normal,
alert and emergency operational sys- 21. Make more effective and wider use of
tem conditions. Clarify roles, responsi- system protection measures.29
bilities, and authorities of reliability
InitsrequirementsofFebruary10,2004,NERC:
coordinators and control areas under
A. Directedalltransmissionownerstoevaluate
each condition.28
thesettingsofzone3relaysonalltransmission
NERCshoulddevelopbyJune30,2004definitions linesof230kVandhigher.
fornormal,alert,andemergencysystemcondi-
B. Directedallregionalcouncilstoevaluatethe
tions,andclarifyreliabilitycoordinatorandcon-
feasibilityandbenefitsofinstalling
trolareafunctions,responsibilities,required
under-voltageloadsheddingcapabilityinload
capabilities,andrequiredauthoritiesundereach
centers.
operationalsystemcondition.
C. Calledforanevaluationwithinoneyearofits
System operators need common definitions for
planningstandardonsystemprotectionand
normal,alert,andemergencyconditionstoenable
controltotakeintoaccountthelessonsfromthe
them to act appropriately and predictably as sys- August14blackout.
tem conditions change. On August 14, the princi-
TheTaskForcesupportstheseactionsstrongly,
palentitiesinvolvedintheblackoutdidnothavea
andrecommendscertainadditionalmeasures,as
shared understanding of whether the grid was in
describedbelow.
anemergencycondition,nordidtheyhaveacom-
monunderstandingofthefunctions,responsibili- A. Evaluation of Zone 3 Relays
ties, capabilities, and authorities of reliability NERC:
coordinators and control areas under emergency Industry is to review zone 3 relays on lines of
or near-emergency conditions. 230 kV and higher.
NERC: Task Force:
On February 10, 2004, NERC’s Board of Recommends that NERC broaden the review
Trustees directed NERC’s Operating Commit- to include operationally significant 115 kV
tee to “clarify reliability coordinator and con- and 138 kV lines, e.g., lines that are part of
trol area functions, responsibilities, capabili- monitored flowgates or interfaces. Transmis-
ties, and authorities” by June 30, 2004. sionownersshouldalsolookforzone2relays
set to operate like zone 3s.
Task Force:
Recommends that NERC go further and de-
B. Evaluation of Applicability of Under-Voltage
velop clear definitions of three operating sys-
Load Shedding
temconditions,alongwithclearstatementsof
NERC:
the roles and responsibilities of all partici-
Required each regional reliability council to
pants,toensureeffectiveandtimelyactionsin
evaluate the feasibility and benefits of un-
critical situations.
der-voltageloadshedding(UVLS)capabilityin
Designating three alternative system conditions loadcentersthatcouldbecomeunstableasare-
(normal, alert, and emergency) would help grid sult of insufficient reactive power following
managers to avert and deal with emergencies credible multiple-contingency events. The re-
through preventive action. Many difficult situa- gions should complete the initial studies and
tions are avoidable through strict adherence to reporttheresultstoNERCwithinoneyear.The
sound procedures during normal operations. regions should promote the installation of un-
However, unanticipated difficulties short of an der-voltage load shedding capabilities within
emergencystillarise,andtheymustbeaddressed critical areas where beneficial, as determined
swiftlyandskillfullytopreventthemfrombecom- by the studies to be effective in preventing or
ing emergencies. Doing so requires a high level of containing an uncontrolled cascade of the
situational awareness that is difficult to sustain power system.
indefinitely, so an intermediate “alert” state is
158  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

Task Force: yearthereal-timeoperatingtoolsnecessaryfor
RecommendsthatNERCrequiretheresultsof reliabilityoperationandreliabilitycoordination,
the regional studies to be provided to federal includingbackupcapabilities.Thecommittee’s
reportistoaddressbothminimumacceptable
and state or provincial regulators at the same
capabilitiesforcriticalreliabilityfunctionsanda
time that they are reported to NERC. In addi-
guidetobestpractices.
tion,NERCshouldrequireeveryentitywitha
new or existing UVLS program to have a TheTaskForcesupportstheserequirements
well-documented set of guidelines for opera- strongly.ItrecommendsthatNERCrequirethe
torsthatspecifytheconditionsandtriggersfor committeeto:
UVLS use. A.Giveparticularattentioninitsreporttothe
developmentofguidancetocontrolareasand
C. Evaluation of NERC’s Planning Standard III reliabilitycoordinatorsontheuseofautomated
wide-areasituationvisualizationdisplaysys-
NERC:
temsandtheintegrityofdatausedinthosesys-
PlanstoevaluatePlanningStandardIII,System
tems.
ProtectionandControl,andpropose,byMarch
1, 2005, specific revisions to the criteria to ad- B.PrepareitsreportinconsultationwithFERC,
dress adequately the issue of slowing or limit- appropriateauthoritiesinCanada,DOE,and
ing the propagation of a cascading failure, in theregionalcouncils.Thereportshouldalso
informactionsbyFERCandCanadian
light of the experience gained on August 14.
governmentagenciestoestablishminimum
Task Force:
functionalrequirementsforcontrolareaopera-
RecommendsthatNERC,aspartofthereview torsandreliabilitycoordinators.
of Planning Standard III, determine the goals
TheTaskForcealsorecommendsthatFERC,DHS,
and principles needed to establish an inte-
andappropriateauthoritiesinCanadashould
gratedapproachtorelayprotectionforgener-
requireannualindependenttestingandcertifica-
atorsandtransmissionlinesandtheuseofun-
tionofindustryEMSandSCADAsystemstoensure
der-frequency and under-voltage load shed-
