ration was aided by the ability to energize in situations involving an actual viola-
transmission from neighboring systems, thereby
tion of an Operating Security Limit.
speeding the recovery.
Streamline the TLR process.43
Despite the apparent success of the restoration
NERCshouldclarifythattheTLRprocedureis
effort, it is important to evaluate the results in
oftentooslowforuseinsituationsinwhichan
moredetailtocomparethemwithpreviousblack- affectedsystemisalreadyinviolationofanOper-
out/restoration studies and determine opportuni- atingSecurityLimit.NERCshouldalsoevaluate
ties for improvement. Black start and restoration experiencetodatewiththeTLRprocedureand
plans are often developed through study of simu- proposebySeptember1,2004,waystomakeitless
lated conditions. Robust testing of live systems is cumbersome.
difficult because of the risk of disturbing the sys-
Thereviewsofcontrolareaandreliabilitycoordi-
tem or interrupting customers. The August 14
nator transcripts from August 14 confirm that the
blackout provides a valuable opportunity to
TLRprocessiscumbersome,perhapsunnecessar-
reviewactualeventsandexperiencestolearnhow
ilyso,andnotfastandpredictableenoughforuse
tobetterprepareforsystemblackstartandrestora-
situationsinwhichanOperatingSecurityLimitis
tioninthefuture.Thatopportunityshouldnotbe
close to or actually being violated. NERC should
lost.
develop an alternative to TLRs that can be used
quickly to address alert and emergency
30. Clarify criteria for identification of
conditions.
operationally critical facilities, and
improve dissemination of updated
Group III. Physical and Cyber Security
information on unplanned outages.42
of North American Bulk Power Systems
NERCshouldworkwiththecontrolareasandreli-
abilitycoordinatorstoclarifythecriteriaforiden- 32. Implement NERC IT standards.
tifyingcriticalfacilitieswhoseoperationalstatus
TheTaskForcerecommendsthatNERCstandards
canaffectthereliabilityofneighboringareas,and
relatedtophysicalandcybersecurityshouldbe
toimprovemechanismsforsharinginformation
understoodasbeingincludedwithinthebodyof
aboutunplannedoutagesofsuchfacilitiesinnear
standardstobemademandatoryandenforceable
real-time.
inRecommendationNo.1.Further:
The lack of accurate, near real-time information A. NERCshouldensurethattheindustryhas
about unplanned outages degraded the perfor- implementeditsUrgentActionStandard1200;
mance of state estimator and reliability assess- finalize,implement,andensuremembership
ment functions on August 14. NERC and the compliancewithitsReliabilityStandard1300
industry must improve the mechanisms for shar- forCyberSecurityandtakeactionstobetter
ingoutageinformationintheoperatingtimehori- communicateandenforcethesestandards.
zon (e.g., 15 minutes or less), to ensure the B. CAsandRCsshouldimplementexistingand
accurateandtimelysharingofoutagedataneeded emergingNERCstandards,developandimple-
by real-time operating tools such as state mentbestpracticesandpoliciesforITand
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  163

securitymanagement,andauthenticateand that cover self-certification, self-assess-
authorizecontrolsthataddressEMSautoma- ment, and/or third-party audit.
tionsystemownershipandboundaries.
 Workwithfederal,state,andprovincial/terri-
Interviews and analyses conducted by the SWG torial jurisdictional departments and agen-
indicate that within some of the companies inter- cies to regularly update private and public
viewedtherearepotentialopportunitiesforcyber sector standards, policies, and other
system compromise of EMS and their supporting guidance.
IT infrastructure. Indications of procedural and   CAs and RCs:
technical IT management vulnerabilities were
 Implement existing and emerging NERC
observed in some facilities, such as unnecessary
standards.
software services not denied by default, loosely
controlled system access and perimeter control,  Develop and implement best practices and
poor patch and configuration management, and policies for IT and security management
poor system security documentation. drawingfromexistingNERCandgovernment
authorities’ best practices.45 These should
An analysis of the more prevalent policies and
include, but not necessarily be limited to:
standards within the electricity sector revealed
1.Policies requiring that automation system
that there is existing and expanding guidance on
products be delivered and installed with
standards within the sector to perform IT and
unnecessary services deactivated in order
informationsecuritymanagement.44NERCissued
to improve “out-of-the-box security.”
a temporary standard (Urgent Action Standard
2.The creation of centralized system admin-
1200, Cyber Security) on August 13, 2003, and is
istrationauthoritywithineachCAandRC
developing the formal Reliability Standard 1300
tomanageaccessandpermissionsforauto-
for Cyber Security. Both start the industry down
mation access (including vendor manage-
the correct path, but there is a need to communi-
mentbackdoors,linkstootherautomation
cateandenforcethesestandardsbyprovidingthe
systems, and administrative connections).
industry with recommended implementation
guidance. Implementation guidance regarding  Authenticate and authorize controls that
these sector-wide standards is especially impor- address EMS automation system ownership
tant given that implementation procedures may andboundaries,andensureaccessisgranted
differ among CAs and RCs. only to users who have corresponding job
responsibilities.
In order to address the finding described above,
the Task Force recommends:
33. Develop and deploy IT management
  NERC:
procedures.
 Ensurethattheindustryhasimplementedits
CAs’andRCs’ITandEMSsupportpersonnel
Urgent Action Standard 1200 and determine
shoulddevelopproceduresforthedevelopment,
iftheguidancecontainedthereinneedstobe
testing,configuration,andimplementationoftech-
strengthened or amended in the ongoing
nologyrelatedtoEMSautomationsystemsandalso
development of its Reliability Standard 1300
defineandcommunicateinformationsecurityand
for Cyber Security.
performancerequirementstovendorsonacontinu-
 Finalize, implement, and ensure member- ingbasis.Vendorsshouldensurethatsystem
ship compliance of its Reliability Standard upgrades,servicepacks,andbugfixesaremade
1300 for Cyber Security and take actions to availabletogridoperatorsinatimelymanner.
better communicate and enforce these stan- Interviews and analyses conducted by the SWG
dards. These actions should include, but not indicate that, in some instances, there were
necessarily be limited to: ill-defined and/or undefined procedures for EMS
automationsystemssoftwareandhardwaredevel-
1.The provision of policy, process, and
opment,testing,deployment,andbackup.Inaddi-
implementationguidancetoCAsandRCs;
tion, there were specific instances of failures to
and
perform system upgrade, version control, mainte-
2.Theestablishmentofmechanismsforcom-
nance, rollback, and patch management tasks.
pliance,audit,andenforcement.Thismay
include recommendations, guidance, or At one CA, these procedural vulnerabilities were
agreements between NERC, CAs and RCs compounded by inadequate, out-of-date, or non-
164  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

existingmaintenancecontractswithEMSvendors ineffective monitoring and control over EMS-
and contractors. This could lead to situations supporting IT infrastructure and overall IT net-
wheregridoperatorscouldalterEMScomponents work health. In these cases, both grid operators
without vendor notification or authorization as andITsupportpersonneldidnothavesituational
well as scenarios in which grid operators are not awarenessofthehealthoftheITsystemsthatpro-
aware of or choose not to implement vendor- vide grid information both globally and locally.
recommended patches and upgrades. This resulted in an inability to detect, assess,
respond to, and recover from IT system-related
cyber failures (failed hardware/software, mali-
34. Develop corporate-level IT security
cious code, faulty configurations, etc.).
governance and strategies.
In order to address the finding described above,
CAsandRCsandothergrid-relatedorganizations
the Task Force recommends:
shouldhaveaplannedanddocumentedsecurity
  ITandEMSsupportpersonnelimplementtech-
strategy,governancemodel,andarchitecturefor
EMSautomationsystems. nicalcontrolstodetect,respondto,andrecover
from system and network problems.
Interviews and analysis conducted by the SWG
indicate that in some organizations there is evi-   Grid operators, dispatchers, and IT and EMS
dence of an inadequate security policy, gover- support personnel be provided with the tools
nance model, strategy, or architecture for EMS and training to ensure that:
automation systems. This is especially apparent
 The health of IT systems is monitored and
with legacy EMS automation systems that were
maintained.
originally designed to be stand-alone systems but
that are now interconnected with internal (corpo-  These systems have the capability to be
rate) and external (vendors, Open Access Same repaired and restored quickly, with a mini-
TimeInformationSystems(OASIS),RCs,Internet, mum loss of time and access to global and
etc.) networks. It should be noted that in some of internal grid information.
the organizations interviewed this was not the
 Contingency and disaster recovery proce-
caseandinfacttheyappearedtoexcelintheareas
duresexistandcanservetotemporarilysub-
of security policy, governance, strategy, and
stitute for systems and communications
architecture.
failures during times when EMS automation
In order to address the finding described above, system health is unknown or unreliable.
the Task Force recommends that CAs, RCs, and
 Adequate verbal communication protocols
other grid-related organizations have a planned
and procedures exist between operators and
and documented security strategy, governance
ITandEMSsupportpersonnelsothatopera-
model, and architecture for EMS automation sys-
torsareawareofanyIT-relatedproblemsthat
tems covering items such as network design, sys-
may be affecting their situational awareness
tem design, security devices, access and
of the power grid.
authentication controls, and integrity manage-
ment as well as backup, recovery, and contin-
gency mechanisms.
36. Initiate a U.S.-Canada risk manage-
ment study.
35. Implement controls to manage system
Incooperationwiththeelectricitysector,federal
health, network monitoring, and inci-
governmentsshouldstrengthenandexpandthe
dent management.
scopeoftheexistingriskmanagementinitiatives
byundertakingabilateral(Canada-U.S.)studyof
ITandEMSsupportpersonnelshouldimplement
thevulnerabilitiesofsharedelectricityinfrastruc-
technicalcontrolstodetect,respondto,and
tureandcrossborderinterdependencies.Common
recoverfromsystemandnetworkproblems.Grid
threatandvulnerabilityassessmentmethodologies
operators,dispatchers,andITandEMSsupport
shouldbealsodeveloped,basedonthework
personnelshouldbeprovidedthetoolsandtrain-
undertakeninthepilotphaseofthecurrentjoint
ingtoensurethatthehealthofITsystemsismoni-
Canada-U.S.vulnerabilityassessmentinitiative,
toredandmaintained.
andtheirusepromotedbyCAsandRCs.Tocoin-
Interviews and analysis conducted by the SWG cidewiththeseinitiatives,theelectricitysector,in
indicate that in some organizations there was associationwithfederalgovernments,should
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  165

developpoliciesandbestpracticesforeffective (Canada-U.S.) study of the vulnerabilities of
riskmanagementandriskmitigation. shared electricity infrastructure and cross bor-
der interdependencies. The study should
Effective risk management is a key element in
encompass cyber, physical, and personnel
assuring the reliability of our critical infrastruc-
security processes and include mitigation and
tures. It is widely recognized that the increased
bestpractices,identifyingareasthatwouldben-
reliance on IT by critical infrastructure sectors,
efit from further standardization.
including the energy sector, has increased the
vulnerability of these systems to disruption via   Common threat and vulnerability assessment
cybermeans.ThebreadthoftheAugust14,2003, methodologies should be developed, based on
power outage illustrates the vulnerabilities and the work undertaken in the pilot phase of the
interdependencies inherent in our electricity current joint Canada-U.S. vulnerability assess-
infrastructure. ment initiative, and their use promoted by CAs
and RCs.
Canada and the United States, recognizing the
importance of assessing the vulnerabilities of   The electricity sector, in association with fed-
shared energy systems, included a provision to eral governments, should develop policies and
address this issue in the Smart Border Declara- bestpracticesforeffectiveriskmanagementand
tion,46 signed on December 12, 2001. Both coun- risk mitigation.
triescommitted,pursuanttoActionItem21ofthe
Declaration,to“conductbi-nationalthreatassess-
37. Improve IT forensic and diagnostic
ments on trans-border infrastructure and identify
necessary protection measures, and initiate capabilities.
assessmentsfortransportationnetworksandother
CAsandRCsshouldseektoimproveinternal
critical infrastructure.” These joint assessments
forensicanddiagnosticcapabilities,ensurethatIT
will serve to identify critical vulnerabilities,
supportpersonnelwhosupportEMSautomation
strengths and weaknesses while promoting the systemsarefamiliarwiththesystems’designand
sharingandtransferofknowledgeandtechnology implementation,andmakecertainthatITsupport
to the energy sector for self-assessment purposes. personnelwhosupportEMSautomationsystems
havearetrainedinusingappropriatetoolsfor
A team of Canadian and American technical
diagnosticandforensicanalysisandremediation.
experts, using methodology developed by the
Argonne National Laboratory in Chicago, Illinois, Interviews and analyses conducted by the SWG
began conducting the pilot phase of this work in indicatethat,insomecases,ITsupportpersonnel
January 2004. The work involves a series of joint who are responsible for EMS automation systems
Canada-U.S. assessments of selected shared criti- areunabletoperformforensicanddiagnosticrou-
cal energy infrastructure along the Canada-U.S. tinesonthosesystems.Thisappearstostemfrom
border,includingtheelectricaltransmissionlines alackoftools,documentationandtechnicalskills.
anddamsatNiagaraFalls-OntarioandNewYork. It should be noted that some of the organizations
The pilot phase will be completed by March 31, interviewed excelled in this area but that overall
2004. performance was lacking.
The findings of the ESWG and SWG suggest that In order to address the finding described above,
among the companies directly involved in the the Task Force recommends:
power outage, vulnerabilities and interdependen-   CAs and RCs seek to improve internal forensic
cies of the electric system were not well under- anddiagnosticcapabilitiesaswellasstrengthen
stood and thus effective risk management was coordination with external EMS vendors and
inadequate. In some cases, risk assessments did contractors who can assist in servicing EMS
not exist or were inadequate to support risk man- automation systems;
agement and risk mitigation plans.
  CAs and RCs ensure that IT support personnel
In order to address these findings, the Task Force who support EMS automation systems are
recommends: familiar with the systems’ design and imple-
  In cooperation with the electricity sector, fed- mentation; and
eral governments should strengthen and   CAs and RCs ensure that IT support personnel
