Thelicensees’returntopoweroperationfollowsa rodshavebeeninsertedtostopthefissionprocess,
deliberate process controlled by plant procedures thecontinuingdecayofradioactiveisotopesinthe
andNRCregulations.Ginna,IndianPoint2,Nine reactorcoreproducesasignificantamountofheat
Mile2,andOysterCreekresumedelectricalgener- formanyweeks.Ifthisdecayheatisnotremoved,
ation on August 17. FitzPatrick and Nine Mile 1 itwillcausefueldamageandthereleaseofhighly
resumedelectricalgenerationonAugust18.Fermi radioactive isotopes from the reactor core. The
2 resumed electrical generation on August 20. failureofthealternatingcurrentemergencypower
PerryresumedelectricalgenerationonAugust21. supplies in conjunction with a LOOP is known
Indian Point 3 resumed electrical generation on as a station blackout. Failures of the emergency
Table 8.2. Summary of Events for U. S. Nuclear Power Plants
Operating Status
at Time of Event Response to Event
Reactor and Emergency
Nuclear Plant Unit Full Power Not Operating Turbine Trip Diesels used
Davis-Besse (near Toledo, OH). . . . . . . . . 1 √ √
Fermi (near Toledo, OH). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 √ √ √
James A. FitzPatrick (near Oswego, NY). . 1 √ √ √
Ginna (near Rochester, NY). . . . . . . . . . . . 1 √ √ √
Indian Point (near New York City, NY). . . . 2 √ √ √
3 √ √ √
Nine Mile Point (near Oswego, NY) . . . . . . 1 √ √ √
2 √ √ √
Oyster Creek (near Toms River, NJ) . . . . . 1 √ √
Perry (near Painesville, OH). . . . . . . . . . . . 1 √ √ √
120  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

powersupplieswouldseriouslyhindertheability of the event either automatically shut down as a
of the plant operators to carry out the required result of the grid disturbance or automatically
safety functions. Nuclear plants can cope with a reduced power while waiting for the grid to be
station blackout for a limited time without suffer- reestablished. In addition, the Point Lepreau
ing fuel damage. However, recovery of the grid or Nuclear Generating Station in New Brunswick
the restoration of an emergency power supply is was forced to reduce electricity production for a
neededforlong-termdecayheatremoval.Forthis short period.
reason, the NRC considers LOOP events to be
The Canadian NWG (CNWG) was mandated to:
potential precursors to more serious situations.
review the sequence of events for each Canadian
The risk of reactor core damage increases as the
nuclear plant; determine whether any events
LOOP frequency or duration increases.
causedorcontributedtothepowersystemoutage;
Offsite power is considered the preferred power evaluate any potential safety issues arising as a
source for responding to all off-normal events or result of the event; evaluate the effect on safety
accidents. However, if the grid is operated in a and the reliability of the grid of design features,
stressed configuration, the loss of the nuclear operating procedures, and regulatory require-
plant generation may result in grid voltage drop- ments at Canadian nuclear power plants; and
ping below the level needed for the plant safety assess the impact of associated regulator perfor-
loads. In that case, each plant is designed such mance and regulatory decisions.
that voltage relays will automatically disconnect
In Ontario, 11 nuclear units were operating and
the plant safety-related electrical buses from the
deliveringpowertothegridatthetimeofthegrid
gridandreenergizethemfromtheemergencydie-
disturbance:4atBruceB,4atDarlington,and3at
sel generators (EDGs). Although the resultant
Pickering B. Of the 11 reactors, 7 shut down as a
safety system responses have been analyzed and
result of the event (1 at Bruce B, 3 at Darlington,
foundacceptable,thelossofoffsitepowerreduces
and 3 at Pickering B). Four reactors (3 at Bruce B
theplant’ssafetymargin.Italsoincreasestherisk
and 1 at Darlington) disconnected safely from the
associatedwithfailuresoftheEDGs.Fortheserea-
grid but were able to avoid shutting down and
sons, the NRC periodically assesses the impact of
wereavailabletosupplypowertotheOntariogrid
grid reliability on overall nuclear plant safety.
as soon as reconnection was enabled by Ontario’s
The NRC monitors grid reliability under its nor- Independent Market Operator (IMO).
mal monitoring programs, such as the operating
NewBrunswickPower’sPointLepreauGenerating
experience program, and has previously issued
Stationrespondedtothelossofgrideventbycut-
reportsrelatedtogridreliability.TheNRCiscon-
ting power to 460 MW, returning to fully stable
tinuingwithaninternalreviewofthereliabilityof
conditionsat16:35EDT,within25minutesofthe
theelectricalgridandtheeffectontheriskprofile
event. Hydro Québec’s (HQ) grid was not affected
for nuclear power plants. The NRC will consider
by the power system outage, and HQ’s Gentilly-2
theimplicationsoftheAugust14,2003,Northeast
nuclear station continued to operate normally.
blackout under the NRC’s regulations. The NRC
is conducting an internal review of its station Havingreviewedtheoperatingdataforeachplant
blackout rule, and the results of the August 14th and the responses of the power stations and their
eventwillbefactoredintothatreview.Ifthereare staff to the event, the CNWG concludes the
additional findings, the NRC will address them following:
through the NRC’s normal process.
  Noneofthereactoroperatorshadanyadvanced
warning of impending collapse of the grid.
Findings of the Canadian Nuclear
 Trend data obtained indicate stable condi-
Working Group
tions until a few minutes before the event.
Summary  TherewerenopriorwarningsfromOntario’s
IMO.
On the afternoon of August 14, 2003, southern
Ontario, along with the northeastern United   Canadian nuclear power plants did not trigger
States,experiencedawidespreadelectricalpower the power system outage or contribute to its
system outage. Eleven nuclear power plants in spread. Rather they responded, as anticipated,
Ontariooperatingathighpowerlevelsatthetime inordertoprotectequipmentandsystemsfrom
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  121

the grid disturbances. Plant data confirm the rapid reductions in reactor power. While
following. greaterflexibilitywithrespecttouseofadjuster
rods would not have prevented the shutdown,
 AtBruceBandPickeringB,frequencyand/or
some units, particularly those at Darlington,
voltage fluctuations on the grid resulted in
might have been able to return to service less
the automatic disconnection of generators
than 1 hour after the initiating event.
from the grid. For those units that were suc-
cessful in maintaining the unit generators   Off-sitepowerwasunavailableforvaryingperi-
operational,reactorpowerwasautomatically ods of time, from approximately 3 hours at
reduced. Bruce B to approximately 9 hours at Pickering
A.DespitethehighpriorityassignedbytheIMO
 At Darlington, load swing on the grid led to
to restoring power to the nuclear stations, the
the automatic reduction in power of the four
stationshadsomedifficultyinobtainingtimely
reactors. The generators were, in turn, auto-
information about the status of grid recovery
matically disconnected from the grid.
and the restoration of Class IV power. This
 ThreereactorsatBruceBandoneatDarling-
information is important for Ontario Power
tonwerereturnedto60%power.Thesereac- Generation’s and Bruce Power’s response
tors were available to deliver power to the strategy.
grid on the instructions of the IMO.
  Required regulatory approvals from CNSC staff
 Three units at Darlington were placed in a were obtained quickly and did not delay the
zero-power hot state, and four units at restart of the units; however, CNSC staff was
Pickering B and one unit at Bruce B were unable to immediately activate the CNSC’s
placed in a guaranteed shutdown state. Emergency Operation Centre because of loss of
  There were no risks to health and safety of power to the CNSC’s head office building.
CNSC staff, therefore, established communica-
workers or the public as a result of the shut-
tions with licensees and the U.S. NRC from
down of the reactors.
other locations.
 Turbine, generator, and reactor automatic
safety systems worked as designed to Introduction
respond to the loss of grid.
The primary focus of the CNWG during Phase I
 Station operating staff and management fol- wastoaddressnuclearpowerplantresponserele-
lowed approved Operating Policies & Princi- vanttothepoweroutageofAugust14,2003.Data
ples(OP&Ps)inrespondingtothelossofgrid. were collected from each power plant and ana-
At all times, operators and shift supervisors lyzedinordertodetermine:thecauseofthepower
madeappropriatelyconservativedecisionsin outage; whether any activities at these plants
favor of protecting health and safety. caused or contributed to the power outage; and
whether there were any significant safety issues.
The CNWG commends the staff of Ontario Power
In order to obtain reliable and comparable infor-
Generation and Bruce Power for their response to
mationanddatafromeachnuclearpowerplant,a
the power system outage. At all times, staff acted
questionnaire was developed to help pinpoint
in accordance with established OP&Ps, and took
how each nuclear power plant responded to the
an appropriately conservative approach to
August 14 grid transients. Where appropriate,
decisions.
additional information was obtained from the
During the course of its review, the CNWG also ESWG and SWG.
identified the following secondary issues:
The operating data from each plant were com-
  Equipment problems and design limitations at
pared against the plant design specifications to
PickeringBresultedinatemporaryreductionin
determine whether the plants responded as
the effectiveness of some of the multiple safety
expected. Based on initial plant responses to the
barriers, although the equipment failure was
questionnaire, supplemental questions were
within the unavailability targets found in the
developed,asrequired,tofurtherclarifyoutstand-
OP&PsapprovedbytheCNSCaspartofOntario
ing matters. Supplementary information on the
Power Generation’s licence.
design features of Ontario’s nuclear power plants
  Existing OP&Ps place constraints on the use of was also provided by Ontario Power Generation
adjuster rods to respond to events involving and Bruce Power. The CNWG also consulted a
122  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

number of subject area specialists, including maintain the reactor at 60% full power if the gen-
CNSC staff, to validate the responses to the ques- erator becomes disconnected from the grid and to
tionnaire and to ensure consistency in their maintain this “readiness” condition if necessary
interpretation. for days. Once reconnected to the grid, the unit
can be loaded to 60% full power within several
In addition to the stakeholder consultations dis-
minutes and can achieve full power within 24
cussed in the Introduction to this chapter, CNSC
hours.
staff met with officials from Ontario’s Independ-
ent Market Operator on January 7, 2004. As with other nuclear reactors, CANDU reactors
normally operate continuously at full power
Typical Design, Operational, and
except when shut down for maintenance and
Protective Features of CANDU Nuclear
inspections. As such, while they provide a stable
Power Plants source of baseload power generation, they cannot
provide significant additional power in response
There are 22 CANDU nuclear power reactors in
to sudden increases in demand. CANDU power
Canada—20locatedinOntarioat5multi-unitsta-
plants are not designed for black-start operation;
tions (Pickering A and Pickering B located in
that is, they are not designed to start up in the
Pickering, Darlington located in the Municipality
absence of power from the grid.
of Clarington, and Bruce A and Bruce B located
near Kincardine). There are also single-unit Electrical Distribution Systems
CANDU stations at Bécancour, Québec (Gentilly-
The electrical distribution systems at nuclear
2), and Point Lepreau, New Brunswick.
power plants are designed to satisfy the high
In contrast to the pressurized water reactors used safetyandreliabilityrequirementsfornuclearsys-
intheUnitedStates,whichuseenricheduranium tems. This is achieved through flexible bus
fuel and a light water coolant-moderator, all arrangements,highcapacitystandbypowergener-
housedinasingle,largepressurevessel,aCANDU ation, and ample redundancy in equipment.
reactorusesfuelfabricatedfromnaturaluranium,
Where continuous power is required, power is
with heavy water as the coolant and moderator.
supplied either from batteries (for continuous DC
The fuel and pressurized heavy water coolant are
power,ClassI)orviainverters(forcontinuousAC
containedin380to480pressuretubeshousedina
power, Class II). AC supply for safety-related
calandria containing the heavy water moderator
equipment, which can withstand short interrup-
under low pressure. Heat generated by the fuel is
tion (on the order of 5 minutes), is provided by
removed by heavy water coolant that flows
Class III power. Class III power is nominally sup-
through the pressure tubes and is then circulated
plied through Class IV; when Class IV becomes
to the boilers to produce steam from demineral-
unavailable, standby generators are started auto-
ized water.
matically, and the safety-related loads are picked
While the use of natural uranium fuel offers
upwithin5minutesofthelossofClassIVpower.
important benefits from the perspectives of safe-
guardsandoperatingeconomics,onedrawbackis The Class IV power is an AC supply to reactor
that it restricts the ability of a CANDU reactor to equipmentandsystemsthatcanwithstandlonger
recover from a large power reduction. In particu- interruptionsinpower.ClassIVpowercanbesup-
lar, the lower reactivity of natural uranium fuel plied either from the generator through a trans-
means that CANDU reactors are designed with a former or from the grid by another transformer.
small number of control rods (called “adjuster ClassIVpowerisnotrequiredforreactorstoshut
rods”) that are only capable of accommodating down safely.
power reductions to 60%. The consequence of a
In addition to the four classes of power described
largerpowerreductionisthatthereactorwill“poi-
above, there is an additional source of power
son out” and cannot be made critical for up to 2
known as the Emergency Power System (EPS).
daysfollowingapowerreduction.Bycomparison,
EPS is a separate power system consisting of its
theuseofenrichedfuelenablesatypicalpressur-
ownon-sitepowergenerationandACandDCdis-
ized water reactor to operate with a large number
tribution systems whose normal supply is from
of control rods that can be withdrawn to accom-
theClassIIIpowersystem.ThepurposeoftheEPS
modate power reductions to zero power.
system is to provide power to selected safety-
A unique feature of some CANDU plants— related loads following common mode incidents,
namely,BruceBandDarlington—isacapabilityto such as seismic events.
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  123

Protective Features of CANDU Nuclear Power oftheClassIIIpoweredshutdowncoolingsystem;
Plants heat removal to the shutdown cooling heat
exchangers is by means of the Class III powered
CANDU reactors typically have two separate,
components of the Service Water System.
independent and diverse systems to shut down
thereactorintheeventofanaccidentortransients
CANDU Reactor Response to
inthegrid.ShutdownSystem1(SDS1)consistsof
Loss-of-Grid Event
alargenumberofcadmiumrodsthatdropintothe
coretodecreasethepowerlevelbyabsorbingneu-
Response to Loss of Grid
trons. Shutdown System 2 (SDS2) consists of
high-pressure injection of gadolinium nitrate into Intheeventofdisconnectionfromthegrid,power
thelow-pressuremoderatortodecreasethepower to shut down the reactor safely and maintain
levelbyabsorbingneutrons.AlthoughPickeringA essential systems will be supplied from batteries
