tion, loss of synchronism, excitation system
  Ontario shed a total of 7,800 MW in 2 steps,
failures, with some under-frequency and under-
beginning at 16:10:4
voltage.Inthethirdphaseofgeneratorlosses,431
  New England shed a total of 1,098 MW. generators(84%)trippedaftertheislandsformed,
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  93

many at the same time that under-frequency itbackagainassomefrequencieschangedseveral
load-sheddingwasoccurring.Thisisillustratedin timesbyasmuchas3Hz(about100timesnormal
Figure6.24.Itisworthnoting,however,thatmany deviations).Figure6.25isaplotoftheMWoutput
generators did not trip instantly after the trigger and frequency for one large unit that nearly sur-
condition that led to the trip—rather, many relay vived the disruption but tripped when in-plant
protectivedevicesoperateontimedelaysofmilli- hydraulic control pressure limits were eventually
secondstosecondsinduration,sothatagenerator violated. After the plant control system called for
that reported tripping at 16:10:43 on under- shutdown, the turbine control valves closed and
voltageor“generatorprotection”mighthaveexpe- the generator electrical output ramped down to a
rienced the trigger for that condition several sec- presetvaluebeforethefieldexcitationtrippedand
onds earlier. the generator breakers opened to disconnect the
unitfromthesystem.Thisalsoillustratesthetime
Thehighnumberofgeneratorsthattrippedbefore
lagbetweensystemeventsandthegeneratorreac-
formation of the islands helps to explain why so
tion—thisgeneratorwasfirstdisturbedbysystem
muchofthenortheastblackedoutonAugust14—
conditions at 16:10:37, but did not trip until
many generators had pre-designed protection
16:11:47, over a minute later.
points that shut the unit down early in the cas-
cade, so there were fewer units on-line to prevent Under-frequency (10% of the generators report-
island formation or to maintain balance between ing) and under-voltage (6%) trips both reflect
load and supply within responses to system conditions. Although com-
each island after it formed. Recommendation bustion turbines in particular are designed with
21, page 158
Inparticular,itappearsthat under-voltage relay protection, it is not clear why
some generators tripped to protect the units from this is needed. An under-voltage condition by
conditions that did not justify their protection, itselfandoverasettimeperiodmaynotnecessar-
andmanyothersweresettotripinwaysthatwere ily be a generator hazard (although it could affect
notcoordinatedwiththeregion’sunder-frequency plant auxiliary systems). Some generator under-
load-shedding, rendering that UFLS scheme less voltagerelaysweresettotripatorabove90%volt-
effective. Both factors compromised successful age.However,amotorstallsoutatabout70%volt-
islanding and precipitated the blackouts in ageandamotorstartercontactordropsoutaround
Ontario and New York. 75%,soifthereisacompellingneedtoprotectthe
turbine from the system the under-voltage trigger
Mostoftheunitseparationsfellinthecategoryof
point should be no higher than 80%.
consequential tripping—they tripped off-line in
response to some outside condition on the grid,
Anexcitationfailureiscloselyrelatedtoavoltage
not because of any problem internal to the plant.
trip.Aslocalvoltagesdecreased,sodidfrequency.
Some generators became completely removed
Over-excitation operates on a calculation of
fromallloads;becausethefundamentaloperating
volts/hertz, so as frequency declines faster than
principle of the grid is that load and generation
voltage over-excitation relays would operate. It is
mustbalance,iftherewasnoloadtobeservedthe
not clear that these relays were coordinated with
power plant shut down in response to over-speed
each machine’s exciter controls, to be sure that it
and/or over-voltage protection schemes. Others
wasprotectingthemachinefortheproperrangeof
were overwhelmed because they were among a
itscontrolcapabilities.Largeunitshavetworelays
few power plants within an electrical island, and
todetectvolts/Hz—oneatthegeneratorandoneat
were suddenly called on to serve huge customer
the transformer, each with a slightly different
loads, so the imbalance caused them to trip on
volts/Hz setting and time delay. It is possible that
under-frequency and/or under-voltage protection.
these settings can cause a generator to trip within
Afewweretrippedbyspecialprotectionschemes
a generation-deficient island as frequency is
that activated on excessive frequency or loss of
attempting to rebalance, so these settings should
pre-studied major transmission elements known
be carefully evaluated.
to require large blocks of generation rejection.
TheEastlake5tripat13:31EDTwasanexcitation
The large power swings and excursions of system
system failure—as voltage fell at the generator
frequencyputalltheunitsintheirpaththrougha
bus,thegeneratortriedtoincreasequicklyitspro-
sequence of major disturbances that shocked sev-
duction of voltage on the AC winding of the
eral units into tripping. Plant controls had actu-
machinequickly.Thiscausedthegenerator’sexci-
atedfastgovernoractiononseveralofthesetoturn
tation protection scheme to trip the plant off to
backthethrottle,thenturnitforward,onlytoturn
94  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

Figure 6.24. Generator Trips by Time and Cause
Sammis-Star to Cleveland split from PA Ontario split from West New York to final Ontario separation
Cleveland split to Northeast separation from Eastern Interconnection After all the separations
Northeast separation to first Ontario split from West New York All generator trips
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  95

protect its windings and coils from over-heating. of power off the grid to support the unit’s orderly
Several of the other generators which tripped slow-down and trip due to reverse power flow.
early in the cascade came off under similar cir- This is a standard practice to avoid turbine
cumstances as excitation systems were over- over-speed.AlsowithinNewYork,16gasturbines
stressedtoholdvoltagesup.Seventeengenerators totaling about 400 MW reported tripping for loss
reported tripping for over-excitation. Units that of fuel supply, termed “flame out.” These units’
trip for a cause related to frequency should be trips should be better understood.
evaluated to determine how the unit frequency
Another reason for power plant trips was actions
triggers coordinate with the region’s under-fre-
or failures of plant control systems. One common
quency load-shedding scheme, to assure that the
causeinthiscategorywasalossofsufficientvolt-
generatortripsaresequencedtofollowratherthan
age to in-plant loads. Some plants run their inter-
precede load-shedding. After UFLS operates to
nal cooling and processes (house electrical load)
drop a large block of load, frequency continues to
off the generator or off small, in-house auxiliary
decline for several cycles before rebounding, so it
generators, while others take their power off the
isnecessarytodesignanadequatetimedelayinto
main grid. When large power swings or voltage
generators’ frequency-related protections to keep
drops reached these plants in the latter category,
it on-line long enough to help rebalance against
they tripped off-line because the grid could not
the remaining load.
supply the plant’s in-house power needs reliably.
Fourteen generators reported tripping for under- At least 17 units reported tripping due to loss of
excitation(alsoknownaslossoffield),whichpro- systemconfiguration,includingthelossofatrans-
tects the generator from exciter component fail- mission or distribution line
ures.Thisprotectionschemecanoperateonstable to serve the in-plant loads. Recommendation
as well as transient power swings, so should be Some generators were trip- 11, page 148
examined to determine whether the protection ped by their operators.
settings are appropriate. Eighteen units—primar-
Unfortunately, 40% of the generators that went
ilycombustionturbines—reportedover-currentas
off-lineduringorafterthecascadedidnotprovide
the reason for relay operation.
usefulinformationonthecauseoftrippingintheir
SomegeneratorsinNewYorkfailedinawaythat response to the NERC investigation data request.
exacerbated frequency decay. A generator that Whiletheresponsesavailableoffersignificantand
trippedduetoaboilerorsteamproblemmayhave valid information, the investigation team will
done so to prevent damage due to over-speed and never be able to fully analyze and explain why so
limit impact to the turbine-generator shaft when many generators tripped off-line so early in the
the breakers are opened, and it will attempt to cascade, contributing to the speed and extent of
maintain its synchronous speed until the genera- theblackout.Itisclearthateverygeneratorshould
tor is tripped. To do this, the mechanical part of have some minimum of protection for stator dif-
the system would shut off the steam flow. This ferential, loss of field, and out-of-step protection,
causes the generator to consume a small amount todisconnecttheunitfromthegridwhenitisnot
performing correctly, and also protection for pro-
Figure 6.25. Events at One Large Generator During tect the generator from extreme conditions on the
the Cascade grid that could cause catastrophic damage to the
generator. These protections should be set tight
enough to protect the unit from the grid, but also
wide enough to assure that the unit remains con-
nectedtothegridaslongaspossible.Thiscoordi-
nation is a risk management issue that must
balancetheneedsofthegrid
and customers relative to Recommendation
21, page 158
the needs of the individual
assets.
Key Phase 7 Events
Electric loads and flows do not respect political
boundaries. After the blackout of 1965, as loads
96  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

grew within New York City and neighboring from the eastern New York island. The only
northernNewJersey,theutilitiesservingthearea remaining tie was the PV-20 circuit connecting
deliberatelyincreasedtheintegrationbetweenthe New England and the western New York island,
systems serving this area to increase the flow whichtrippedat16:10:54EDT.BecauseNewEng-
capabilityintoNewYorkandthereliabilityofthe landwasexportingtoNewYorkbeforethedistur-
system as a whole. The combination of the facili- bance across the southwest Connecticut tie, but
tiesinplaceandthepatternofelectricalloadsand importing on the Northwalk-Northport tie, the
flowsonAugust14causedNewYorktobetightly Pleasant Valley path opened east of Long Moun-
linked electrically to northern New Jersey and tain—in other words, internal to southwest Con-
southwest Connecticut, and moved the weak necticut—rather than along the actual New
spots on the grid out past this combined load and York-New England tie.5 Immediately before the
network area. separation, the power swing out of New England
occurredbecausetheNewEnglandgeneratorshad
Figure 6.26 gives an overview of the power flows
increasedoutputinresponsetothedragofpower
and frequencies in the period 16:10:45 EDT
throughOntarioandNewYorkintoMichiganand
through 16:11:00 EDT, capturing most of the key
Ohio.6 The power swings continuing through the
events in Phase 7.
region caused this separation, and caused Ver-
7A) New York-New England Transmission mont to lose approximately 70 MW of load.
Lines Disconnected: 16:10:46 to 16:10:54 EDT
When the ties between New York and New Eng-
Overtheperiod16:10:46EDTto16:10:54EDT,the land disconnected, most of the New England area
separation between New England and New York along with Canada’s Maritime Provinces (New
occurred.Itoccurredalongfiveofthenortherntie Brunswick and Nova Scotia) became an island
lines,andsevenlineswithinsouthwestConnecti- with generation and demand balanced close
cut.Atthetimeoftheeast-westseparationinNew enoughthatitwasabletoremainoperational.The
York at 16:10:49 EDT, New England was isolated New England system had been exporting close to
Figure 6.26. Measured Power Flows and Frequency Across Regional Interfaces, 16:10:45 to 16:11:30 EDT,
with Key Events in the Cascade
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  97

600 MW to New York, so it was relatively genera- high current and overloads in addition to true
tion-richandexperiencedcontinuingfluctuations faults, they will trip out before other lines in the
untilitreachedequilibrium.BeforetheMaritimes pathoflargepowerswingssuchasthe3,500MW
and New England separated from the Eastern powersurgethathitNewYorkonAugust14.New
Interconnectionatapproximately16:11EDT,volt- York’s Total East and Central East interfaces,
ages became depressed across portions of New where the internal split occurred, are routinely
England and some large customers disconnected among the most heavily loaded paths in the state
themselves automatically.7 However, southwest- and are operated under thermal, voltage and sta-
ernConnecticutseparatedfromNewEnglandand bility limits to respect their relative vulnerability
remained tied to the New York system for about and importance.
one minute.
Examination of the loads and generation in the
While frequency within New England wobbled EasternNewYorkislandindicatesbefore16:10:00
slightlyandrecoveredquicklyafter16:10:40EDT, EDT, the area had been importing electricity and
frequency of the New York-Ontario-Michigan- hadlessgenerationon-linethanload.At16:10:50
Ohio island fluctuated severely as additional EDT, seconds after the separation along the Total
lines, loads and generators tripped, reflecting the East interface, the eastern New York area had
severe generation deficiency in Michigan and experienced significant load reductions due to
Ohio. under-frequency load-shedding—Consolidated
Edison, which serves New York City and sur-
Duetoitsgeographyandelectricalcharacteristics,
rounding areas, dropped over 40% of its load on
theQuébecsysteminCanadaistiedtotheremain-
automatic UFLS. But at this time, the system was
deroftheEasternInterconnectionviahighvoltage
still experiencing dynamic conditions—as illus-
DC(HVDC)linksinsteadofACtransmissionlines.
tratedinFigure6.26,frequencywasfalling,flows
Québecwasabletosurvivethepowersurgeswith
and voltages were oscillating, and power plants
only small impacts because the DC connections
were tripping off-line.
shielded it from the frequency swings.
Had there been a slow islanding situation and
7B) New York Transmission Split East-West:
moregenerationon-line,itmighthavebeenpossi-
16:10:49 EDT
ble for the Eastern New York island to rebalance
The transmission system split internally within given its high level of UFLS. But the available
New York along the Total East interface, with the information indicates that events happened so
eastern portion islanding to contain New York quickly and the power swings were so large that
City,northernNewJersey,andsouthwesternCon- rebalancing would have been unlikely, with or
necticut. The eastern New York island had been without the northern New Jersey and southwest
importing energy, so it did not have enough sur- Connecticut loads hanging onto eastern New
viving generation on-line to balance load. Fre- York. This was further complicated because the
quency declined quickly to below 58.0 Hz and high rate of change in voltages at load buses
triggered 7,115 MW of automatic UFLS.8 Fre- reducedtheactuallevelsofloadshedbyUFLSrel-
quency declined further, as did voltage, causing ative to the levels needed and expected.
pre-designed trips at the Indian Point nuclear
The team could not find any way that one electri-
plant and other generators in and around New
cal region might have protected itself against the
YorkCitythrough16:11:10EDT.Thewesternpor-
August 14 blackout, either at electrical borders or
tion of New York remained connected to Ontario
internally.Theteamalsolookedatwhetheritwas
and eastern Michigan.
possible to design special protection schemes to
Theelectricsystemhasinherentweakpointsthat separate one region from its neighborings pro-
vary as a function of the characteristics of the actively,tobufferitselffromapowerswingbefore
physical lines and plants and the topology of the ithit.Thiswasfoundtobeinadvisablefortworea-
lines, loads and flows across the grid at any point sons:(1)asnotedabove,theactofseparationitself
intime.Theweakestpointsonasystemtendtobe could cause oscillations and dynamic instability
those points with the highest impedance, which that could be as damaging to the system as the
routinely are long (over 50 miles or 80 km) over- swing it was protecting against; and (2) there was
head lines with high loading. When such lines no event or symptom on August 14 that could be
havehigh-speedrelayprotectionsthatmaytripon used to trigger such a protection scheme in time.
98  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

7C) The Ontario System Just West of Niagara 7D) Southwest Connecticut Separated from
Falls and West of St. Lawrence Separated from New York City: 16:11:22 EDT
the Western New York Island: 16:10:50 EDT
In southwest Connecticut, when the Long Moun-
At16:10:50EDT,OntarioandNewYorkseparated tain-Plum Tree line (connected to the Pleasant
west of the Ontario/New York interconnection, Valley substation in New York) disconnected at
due to relay operations which disconnected nine 16:11:22 EDT, it left about 500 MW of southwest
230-kV lines within Ontario. These left most of Connecticut demand supplied only through a
Ontarioisolatedtothenorth.Ontario’slargeBeck 138-kV underwater tie to Long Island. About two
and Saunders hydro stations, along with some seconds later, the two 345-kV circuits connecting
Ontario load, the New York Power Authority’s southeastern New York to Long Island tripped,
(NYPA) Niagara and St. Lawrence hydro stations, isolating Long Island and southwest Connecticut,
and NYPA’s 765-kV AC interconnection to their which remained tied together by the underwater
HVDCtiewithQuébec,remainedconnectedtothe Norwalk Harbor-to-Northport 138-kV cable. The
westernNewYorksystem,supportingthedemand cable tripped about 20 seconds later, causing
in upstate New York. southwest Connecticut to black out.
From 16:10:49 to 16:10:50 EDT, frequency in Within the western New York island, the 345-kV
