flow and frequency along the remaining 230-kV 230-kVcorridorswhicharethemainsupplyfeeds
line. into the northern New Jersey area (the two
Roseland-Athenia circuits and the Lin-
At 16:10:45 EDT, northwest Ontario separated
den-Bayway circuit). These circuits supply the
fromtherestofOntariowhentheWawa-Marathon
large customer load in northern New Jersey and
230-kV lines (104 miles or 168 km long) discon-
are a primary route for power transfers into New
nectedalongthenorthernshoreofLakeSuperior,
York City, so they are usually more highly loaded
tripped by zone 1 distance relays at both ends.
thanotherinterfaces.Theselinestrippedwestand
This separation left the loads in the far northwest
southofthelargecustomerloadsinnortheastNew
portionofOntarioconnectedtotheManitobaand
Jersey.
Minnesota systems, and protected them from the
blackout. The separation of New York, Ontario, and New
England from the rest of the Eastern Interconnec-
The 69-mile (111 km) long Branchburg-Ramapo
tion occurred due to natural breaks in the system
500-kV line and Ramapo transformer between
and automatic relay operations, which performed
NewJerseyandNewYorkwasthelastmajortrans-
exactlyastheyweredesignedto.Nohumaninter-
missionpathremainingbetweentheEasternInter-
vention occurred by operators at PJM headquar-
connectionandtheareaultimatelyaffectedbythe
ters or elsewhere to effect this split. At this point,
blackout.Figure6.22showshowthatlinediscon-
the Eastern Interconnection was divided into two
nectedat16:10:45EDT,alongwithotherunderly-
majorsections.Tothenorthandeastofthesepara-
ing230and138-kVlinesinnortheastNewJersey.
tion point lay New York City, northern New Jer-
Branchburg–Ramapo was carrying over 3,000
sey, New York state, New England, the Canadian
MVAand4,500ampswithvoltageat79%beforeit
Maritime Provinces, eastern Michigan, the major-
tripped, either on a high-speed swing into zone 1
ity of Ontario, and the Québec system.
oronadirecttransfertrip.Theinvestigationteam
is still examining why the higher impedance The rest of the Eastern Interconnection, to the
230-kV overhead lines tripped while the under- south and west of the separation boundary, was
ground Hudson-Farragut 230-kV cables did not; not seriously affected by the blackout. Frequency
the available data suggest that the notably lower in the Eastern Interconnection was 60.3 Hz at the
impedanceofundergroundcablesmadetheseless timeofseparation;thismeansthatapproximately
vulnerable to the electrical strain placed on the 3,700MWofexcessgenerationthatwason-lineto
system. export into the northeast was now in the main
EasternIsland,separatedfromtheloadithadbeen
This left the northeast portion of New Jersey con-
serving. This left the northeast island with even
nected to New York, while Pennsylvania and the
lessin-islandgenerationon-lineasitattemptedto
rest of New Jersey remained connected to the rest
rebalance in the next phase of the cascade.
of the Eastern Interconnection. Within northeast
Figure 6.22. PJM to New York Interties Disconnect Phase 7:
Several Electrical Islands Formed
in Northeast U.S. and Canada:
16:10:46 EDT to 16:12 EDT
Overview of This Phase
During the next 3 seconds, the islanded northern
sectionoftheEasternInterconnectionbrokeapart
internally.Figure6.23illustratestheeventsofthis
phase.
7A) New York-New England upstate transmis-
sionlinesdisconnected:16:10:46to16:10:47
EDT
Note: The data in this figure come from the NYISO Energy
7B) New York transmission system split along
ManagementSystemSDAChighspeedanalogsystem,which
records 10 samples per second. Total East interface: 16:10:49 EDT
90  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

7C) TheOntariosystemjustwestofNiagaraFalls measureleavesthegeneratoringoodconditionto
and west of St. Lawrence separated from the help rebuild the system once a blackout is over
western New York island: 16:10:50 EDT and restoration begins. When unstable power
swingsdevelopbetweenagroupofgeneratorsthat
7D) Southwest Connecticut separated from New
are losing synchronization (unable to match fre-
York City: 16:11:22 EDT
quency) with the rest of the system, one effective
7E) Remaining transmission lines between way to stop the oscillations is to stop the flows
Ontario and eastern Michigan separated: entirely by disconnecting the unstable generators
16:11:57 EDT from the remainder of the system. The most com-
monwaytoprotectgeneratorsfrompoweroscilla-
By this point most portions of the affected area
tions is for the transmission system to detect the
were blacked out.
power swings and trip at the locations detecting
theswings—ideallybeforetheswingreachescriti-
Ifthe6thphaseofthecascadewasaboutdynamic
cal levels and harms the generator or the system.
systemoscillations,thelastphaseisastoryofthe
search for balance between loads and generation.
OnAugust14,thecascadebecamearacebetween
Here it is necessary to understand three matters
the power surges and the relays. The lines that
related to system protection—why the blackout
tripped first were generally the longer lines with
stoppedwhereitdid,howandwhyunder-voltage
relay settings using longer apparent impedance
and under-frequency load-shedding work, and
tripping zones and normal time settings. On
what happened to the generators on August 14
August14,relaysonlonglinessuchastheHomer
andwhy.Thesematterbecauseloadsandgenera-
City-Watercure and the Homer City-Stolle Road
tion must ultimately balance in real-time to
345-kV lines in Pennsylvania, that are not highly
remainstable.Whenthegridisbreakingapartinto
integrated into the electrical network, tripped
islands, if generators stay on-line longer, then the
quickly and split the grid between the sections
better the chances to keep the lights on within
thatblackedoutandthosethatrecoveredwithout
each island and restore service following a black-
further propagating the cascade. This same phe-
out; so automatic load-shedding, transmission
nomenonwasseeninthePacificNorthwestblack-
relay protections and generator protections must
outsof1996,whenlonglinestrippedbeforemore
avoidprematuretripping.Theymustallbecoordi-
networked, electrically supported lines.
natedtoreducethelikelihoodofsystembreak-up,
andoncebreak-upoccurs,tomaximizeanisland’s Transmission line voltage divided by its current
chances for electrical survival. flow is called “apparent impedance.” Standard
transmission line protective relays continuously
measure apparent impedance. When apparent
Why the Blackout Stopped
impedancedropswithintheline’sprotectiverelay
Where It Did
set-pointsforagivenperiodoftime,therelaystrip
Extreme system conditions can damage equip-
Figure 6.23. New York and New England Separate,
ment in several ways, from melting aluminum
Multiple Islands Form
conductors (excessive currents) to breaking tur-
binebladesonagenerator(frequencyexcursions).
The power system is designed to ensure that if
conditions on the grid (excessive or inadequate
voltage, apparent impedance or frequency)
threaten the safe operation of the transmission
7A
lines, transformers, or power plants, the threat-
ened equipment automatically separates from the
7B
network to protect itself from physical damage.
7C
Relays are the devices that effect this protection.
7E 7D
Generators are usually the most expensive units
on an electrical system, so system protection
schemes are designed to drop a power plant off
the system as a self-protective measure if grid
conditions become unacceptable. This protective
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  91

the line. The vast majority of trip operations on team has concluded that such schemes would
lines along the blackout boundaries between PJM have been ineffective on August 14.
and New York (for instance) show high-speed
relay targets which indicate that a massive power
Under-Frequency and
surge caused each line to trip. To the relays, this
Under-Voltage Load-Shedding
power surge altered the voltages and currents
enoughthattheyappearedtobefaults.Thepower
surgewascausedbypowerflowingtothoseareas Automatic load-shedding measures are designed
thatweregeneration-deficient(Cleveland,Toledo intotheelectricalsystemtooperateasalastresort,
and Detroit) or rebounding back. These flows under the theory that it is wise to shed some load
occurred purely because of the physics of power inacontrolledfashionifitcanforestallthelossof
flows, with no regard to whether the power flow a great deal of load to an uncontrollable cause.
had been scheduled, because power flows from Thus there are two kinds of automatic load-shed-
areas with excess generation into areas that were ding installed in North America—under-voltage
generation-deficient. load-shedding, which sheds load to prevent local
area voltage collapse, and under-frequency load-
Protective relay settings on transmission lines
shedding,whichisdesignedtorebalanceloadand
operated as they were designed and set to behave
generation within an electrical island once it has
onAugust14.Insomecaseslinerelaysdidnottrip
been created by a system disturbance.
inthepathofapowersurgebecausetheapparent
Automatic under-voltage load-shedding (UVLS)
impedance on the line was not low enough—not
responds directly to voltage conditions in a local
becauseofthemagnitudeofthecurrent,butrather
area. UVLS drops several hundred MW of load in
becausevoltageonthatlinewashighenoughthat
pre-selected blocks within urban load centers,
the resulting impedance was adequate to avoid
triggered in stages when local voltage drops to a
enteringtherelay’stargetzone.Thusrelativevolt-
designated level—likely 89 to 92% or even
agelevelsacrossthenortheastalsoaffectedwhich
higher—withaseveralseconddelay.Thegoalofa
areasblackedoutandwhichareasstayedon-line.
UVLS scheme is to eliminate load in order to
In the U.S. Midwest, as voltage levels declined restore reactive power relative to demand, to pre-
many generators in the affected area were operat- vent voltage collapse and contain a voltage prob-
ingatmaximumreactivepoweroutputbeforethe lem within a local area rather than allowing it to
blackout. This left the system little slack to deal spread in geography and magnitude. If the first
with the low voltage conditions by ramping up load-shed step does not allow the system to
more generators to higher reactive power output rebalance, and voltage continues to deteriorate,
levels, so there was little room to absorb any sys- then the next block of UVLS is dropped. Use of
tem “bumps” in voltage or frequency. In contrast, UVLS is not mandatory, but is done at the option
inthenortheast—particularlyPJM,NewYork,and ofthecontrolareaand/orreliabilitycouncil.UVLS
ISO-New England—operators were anticipating schemes and trigger points should be designed to
high power demands on the afternoon of August respect the local area’s sys-
14,andhadalreadysetupthesystemtomaintain tem vulnerabilities, based Recommendation
highervoltagelevelsandthereforehadmorereac- on voltage collapse studies. 21, page 158
tive reserves on-line in anticipation of later after- AsnotedinChapter4,there
noon needs. Thus, when the voltage and isnoUVLSsysteminplacewithinClevelandand
frequency swings began, these systems had reac- Akron; had such a scheme been implemented
tive power readily available to help buffer their before August, 2003, shedding 1,500 MW of load
areas against potential voltage collapse without inthatareabeforethelossoftheSammis-Starline
widespread generation trips. might have prevented the cascade and blackout.
The investigation team has used simulation to In contrast to UVLS, automatic under-frequency
examine whether special protection schemes, load-shedding (UFLS) is designed for use in
designedtodetectanimpendingcascadeandsep- extreme conditions to stabilize the balance
arate the grid at specific interfaces, could have between generation and load after an electrical
beenorshouldbesetuptostopapowersurgeand island has been formed, dropping enough load to
preventitfromsweepingthroughaninterconnec- allow frequency to stabilize within the island.
tionandcausingthebreadthoflineandgenerator All synchronous generators in North America
trips and islanding that occurred that day. The are designed to operate at 60 cycles per second
92  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

(Hertz) and frequency reflects how well load and It must be emphasized that the entire northeast
generation are balanced—if there is more load system was experiencing large scale, dynamic
than generation at any moment, frequency drops oscillations in this period. Even if the UFLS and
below60Hz,anditrisesabovethatlevelifthereis generation had been perfectly balanced at any
more generation than load. By dropping load to moment in time, these oscillations would have
match available generation within the island, made stabilization difficult and unlikely.
UFLSisasafetynetthathelpstopreventthecom-
plete blackout of the island, which allows faster Why the Generators Tripped Off
systemrestorationafterward.UFLSisnoteffective
if there is electrical instability or voltage collapse Atleast265powerplantswithmorethan508indi-
within the island. vidual generating units shut down in the August
14 blackout. These U.S. and Canadian plants can
Today, UFLS installation is a NERC requirement,
be categorized as follows:
designed to shed at least 25-30% of the load in
steps within each reliability coordinator region. By reliability coordination area:
These systems are designed to drop pre-desig-   Hydro Québec, 5 plants (all isolated onto the
nated customer load automatically if frequency Ontario system)4
getstoolow(sincelowfrequencyindicatestoolit-   Ontario, 92 plants
tle generation relative to load), starting generally
  ISO-New England, 31 plants
when frequency reaches 59.3 Hz. Progressively
  MISO, 32 plants
moreloadissettodropasfrequencylevelsfallfar-
ther.Thelaststepofcustomerloadsheddingisset   New York ISO, 70 plants
at the frequency level just above the set point for   PJM, 35 plants
generation under-frequency protection relays
(57.5Hz),topreventfrequencyfromfallingsolow By type:
thatgeneratorscouldbedamaged(seeFigure2.4).   Conventional steam units, 66 plants (37 coal)
  Combustion turbines, 70 plants (37 combined
In NPCC, following the Northeast blackout of
cycle)
1965, the region adopted automatic under-fre-
quency load-shedding criteria and manual load-   Nuclear, 10 plants—7 U.S. and 3 Canadian,
shedding within ten minutes to prevent a recur- totaling 19 units (the nuclear unit outages are
rence of the cascade and better protect system discussed in Chapter 8)
equipment from damage due to a high-speed sys-   Hydro, 101
tem collapse. Under-frequency load-shedding
  Other, 18.
triggers vary by regional reliability council—New
York and all of the Northeast Power Coordinating Withintheoverallcascadesequence,29(6%)gen-
Council, plus the Mid-Atlantic Area Council use eratorstrippedbetweenthestartofthecascadeat
59.3 Hz as the first step for UFLS, while ECAR 16:05:57 (the Sammis-Star trip) and the split
uses 59.5 Hz as their first step for UFLS. between Ohio and Pennsylvania at 16:10:38.6
EDT(ErieWest-Ashtabula-Perry),whichtriggered
The following automatic UFLS operated on the
thefirstbigpowerswing.Thesetripswerecaused
afternoon of August 14:
by the generators’ protective relays responding to
  Ohio shed over 1,883 MVA beginning at overloaded transmission lines, so many of these
16:10:39 EDT trips were reported as under-voltage or over-
current. The next interval in the cascade was as
  Michigan shed a total of 2,835 MW
the portions of the grid lost synchronism, from
  NewYorkshedatotalof10,648MWinnumer- 16:10:38.6 until 16:10:45.2 EDT, when Michi-
gan-New York-Ontario-New England separated
ous steps, beginning at 16:10:48
from the rest of the Eastern Interconnection. Fifty
  PJM shed a total of 1,324 MVA in 3 steps in more generators (10%) tripped as the islands
northernNewJerseybeginningat16:10:48EDT formed, particularly due to changes in configura-
