effectiveness and thoroughness of regional
councils’ efforts to audit for compliance with
Institutional Issues
reliability requirements have varied signifi-
cantlyfromregiontoregion.Equallyimportant,
Asindicatedabove,theinvestigationteamidenti-
absent mandatory compliance and penalty
fied a number of institutional issues with respect
authority,thereisnorequirementthatanentity
toNERC’sreliabilitystandards.Manyoftheinsti-
found to be deficient in an audit must remedy
tutional problems arise not because NERC is an
the deficiency.
inadequate or ineffective organization, but rather
because it has no structural independence from 5.NERC standards are frequently administrative
the industry it represents and has no authority to and technical rather than results-oriented.
developstrongreliabilitystandardsandtoenforce
6.A recently-adopted NERC process for develop-
compliance with those standards. While many in
ment of standards is lengthy and not yet fully
theindustryandatNERCsupportsuchmeasures,
understoodorappliedbymanyindustrypartic-
legislativeactionbytheU.S.Congressisneededto
ipants. Whether this process can be adapted to
make this happen.
supportanexpediteddevelopmentofclearand
These institutional issues can be summed up auditablestandardsforkeytopicsremainstobe
generally: seen.
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  21

7.NERChasnothadaneffectiveprocesstoensure (While Policy 5 on Emergency Operations does not address
that recommendations made in various reports theissueof“operatingtothemostconservativelimit”when
coordinatingwithothersystemsandoperatingconditionsare
and disturbance analyses are tracked for
notunderstood,otherNERCpoliciesdoaddressthismatter:
accountability. On their own initiative, some
Policy2,SectionA,Standard1,onbasicreliabilityforsingle
regional councils have developed effective contingencies;Policy2,SectionA,Standard2,toreturnasys-
tracking procedures for their geographic areas. tem to within operating security limits within 30 minutes;
Policy 2, Section A, Requirement 1, for formal policies and
Control areas and reliability coordinators operate procedures to provide for transmission security; Policy 5,
the grid every day under guidelines, policies, and GeneralCriteria,torelieveanyabnormalconditionsthatjeop-
ardizereliableoperation;Policy5,SectionC,Requirement1,
requirements established by the industry’s reli-
to relieve security limit violations; and Policy 5, Section 2,
ability community under NERC’s coordination. If
Requirement 2, which gives system operators responsibility
thosepoliciesarestrong,clear,andunambiguous, and authority to alleviate operating security limit violations
theneveryonewillplanandoperatethesystemat usingtimelyandappropriateactions.)
Violation2:FEdidnotnotifyothersystemsofanimpend-
a high level of performance and reliability will be
ing system emergency. (Policy 5, Section A, Requirement 1,
high. But if those policies are ambiguous and do
directsasystemtoinformothersystemsifitisburdeningoth-
not make entities’ roles and responsibilities clear ers,reducingsystemreliability,orifitslackofsinglecontin-
and certain, they allow companies to perform at gency coverage could threaten Interconnection reliability.
varyinglevelsandsystemreliabilityislikelytobe Policy5,SectionA,Criteria,hassimilarprovisions.)
Violation 3: FE’s state estimation/contingency analysis
compromised.
toolswerenotusedtoassessthesystemconditions.(Thisis
addressed in Operating Policy 5, Section C, Requirement 3,
Given that NERC has been a voluntary organiza-
concerning assessment of Operating Security Limit viola-
tionthatmakesdecisionsbasedonmembervotes,
tions, and Policy 4, Section A, Requirement 5, which
if NERC’s standards have been unclear, non- addressesusingmonitoringequipmenttoinformthesystem
specific, lacking in scope, or insufficiently strict, operator of important conditions and the potential need for
thatreflectsatleastasmuchontheindustrycom- correctiveaction.)
Violation4:MISOdidnotnotifyotherreliabilitycoordina-
munitythatdraftsandvotesonthestandardsasit
torsofpotentialproblems.(Policy9,SectionC,Requirement
doesonNERC.Similarly,NERC’sabilitytoobtain
2,directingthereliabilitycoordinatortoalertallcontrolareas
compliance with its requirements through its andreliabilitycoordinatorsofapotentialtransmissionprob-
audit process has been limited by the extent to lem.)
Violation5:MISOwasusingnon-real-timedatatosupport
whichtheindustryhasbeenwillingtosupportthe
real-timeoperations.(Policy9,AppendixD,SectionA,Crite-
audit program.
riaForReliabilityCoordinators5.2,regardingadequatefacili-
ties to perform their responsibilities, including detailed
Endnotes monitoring capability to identify potential security viola-
tions.)
1 Webster’sIINewRiversideUniversityDictionary,Riverside
Violation 6: PJM and MISO as Reliability Coordinators
PublishingCo.,1984.
lackedproceduresorguidelinesbetweenthemselvesonwhen
2 A NERC team looked at whether and how violations of and how to coordinate an operating security limit violation
NERC’s reliability requirements may have occurred in the observedbyoneofthemintheother’sareaduetoacontin-
events leading up to the blackout. They also looked at gencyneartheircommonboundary(Policy9,Appendix9C,
whetherdeficienciesintherequirements,practicesandpro- EmergencyProcedures).Note:SincePolicy9lacksspecifics
cedures of NERC and the regional reliability organizations on coordinated procedures and training, it was not possible
mayhavecontributedtotheblackout.Theyfoundsevenspe- for the bi-national team to identify the exact violation that
cificviolationsofNERCoperatingpolicies(althoughsomeare occurred.
qualifiedbyalackofspecificityintheNERCrequirements). Violation 7: The monitoring equipment provided to FE
The Standards, Procedures and Compliance Investigation operatorswasnotsufficienttobringtheoperators’attention
TeamreviewedtheNERCPoliciesforviolations,buildingon tothedeviationonthesystem.(Policy4,SectionA,System
workandgoingbeyondworkdonebytheRootCauseAnaly- MonitoringRequirementsregardingresourceavailabilityand
sisTeam.BasedonthatreviewtheStandardsteamidentified theuseofmonitoringequipmenttoalertoperatorstotheneed
anumberofviolationsrelatedtopolicies2,4,5,and9. forcorrectiveaction.)
Violation 1: Following the outage of the Chamberlin- 3 NERC has not yet completed its review of planning stan-
Harding345-kVline,FEdidnottakethenecessaryactionsto
dardsandviolations.
returnthesystemtoasafeoperatingstatewithin30minutes.
22  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

4.
Context and Preconditions for the Blackout:
The Northeastern Power Grid
Before the Blackout Began
Summary securelydespitethosevulnerabilities,FirstEnergy
was not doing so because the company had not
conductedthelong-termandoperationalplanning
Thischapterreviewsthestateofthenortheastpor-
studies needed to understand those vulnerabili-
tion of the Eastern Interconnection during the
ties and their operational implications.
days and hours before 16:00 EDT on August 14,
2003,todeterminewhethergridconditionsbefore
It is important to emphasize that establishing
theblackoutwereinsomewayunusualandmight
whetherconditionswerenormalorunusualprior
have contributed to the initiation of the blackout.
toandonAugust14doesnotchangetheresponsi-
Task Force investigators found that at 15:05 East-
bilities and actions expected of the organizations
ern Daylight Time, immediately before the trip-
and operators charged with ensuring power sys-
ping (automatic shutdown) of FirstEnergy’s (FE)
temreliability.AsdescribedinChapter2,theelec-
Harding-Chamberlin 345-kV transmission line,
tricityindustryhasdevelopedandcodifiedasetof
thesystemwaselectricallysecureandwasableto
mutually reinforcing reliability standards and
withstandtheoccurrenceofanyoneofmorethan
practices to ensure that system operators are
800 contingencies, including the loss of the Har-
prepared for the unexpected. The basic assump-
ding-Chamberlinline.Atthattimethesystemwas
tion underlying these standards and practices
electrically within prescribed limits and in com-
is that power system elements will fail or
pliance with NERC’s operating policies.
become unavailable in unpredictable ways and at
Determining that the system was in a reliable
operationalstateat15:05EDTonAugust14,2003, Reliability and Security
isextremelysignificantfordeterminingthecauses
NERC—andthisreport—usethefollowingdefi-
oftheblackout.Itmeansthatnoneoftheelectrical
nitions for reliability, adequacy, and security.
conditions on the system before 15:05 EDT was a
direct cause of the blackout. This eliminates a Reliability: The degree of performance of the
number of possible causes of the blackout, elementsofthebulkelectricsystemthatresults
whether individually or in combination with one in electricity being delivered to customers
another, such as: within accepted standards and in the amount
  Unavailabilityofindividualgeneratorsortrans- desired.Reliabilitymaybemeasuredbythefre-
quency, duration, and magnitude of adverse
mission lines
effects on the electricity supply.
  High power flows across the region
Adequacy: The ability of the electric system to
  Lowvoltagesearlierinthedayoronpriordays
supply the aggregate electrical demand and
  System frequency variations energy requirements of the customers at all
times, taking into account scheduled and rea-
  Low reactive power output from independent
sonably expected unscheduled outages of sys-
power producers (IPPs).
tem elements.
This chapter documents that although the system
Security: The ability of the electric system to
waselectricallysecure,therewasclearexperience
withstandsuddendisturbancessuchaselectric
and evidence that the Cleveland-Akron area was
short circuits or unanticipated loss of system
highly vulnerable to voltage instability problems.
elements.
While it was possible to operate the system
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  23

unpredictable times. Sound reliability manage- It is a basic principle of reliability management
mentisdesignedtoensurethatoperatorscancon- that“operatorsmustoperatethesystemtheyhave
tinue to operate the system within appropriate in front of them”—unconditionally. The system
thermal,voltage,andstabilitylimitsfollowingthe mustbeoperatedatalltimestowithstandanysin-
unexpected loss of any key element (such as a gle contingency and yet be ready within 30 min-
major generator or key transmission facility). utes for the next contingency. If a facility is lost
Thesepracticeshavebeendesignedtomaintaina unexpectedly, the system operators must deter-
functionalandreliablegrid,regardlessofwhether mine whether to make operational changes,
actual operating conditions are normal. including adjusting generator outputs, curtailing
Geography Lesson
InanalyzingtheAugust14blackout,itiscrucial This geographic distinction matters because
to understand the geography of the FirstEnergy the Cleveland-Akron area is a transmission-
area. FirstEnergy has seven subsidiary distribu- constrained load pocket with relatively limited
tion utilities: Toledo Edison, Ohio Edison, and generation. While some analyses of the blackout
The Illuminating Company in Ohio and four refertovoltagesandotherindicatorsmeasuredat
more in Pennsylvania and New Jersey. Its Ohio the boundaries of FE’s Ohio control area, those
control area spans the three Ohio distribution indicators have limited relevance to the black-
utility footprints and that of Cleveland Public out—the indicators of conditions at the edges of
Power, a municipal utility serving the city of and within the Cleveland-Akron area are the
Cleveland. Within FE’s Ohio control area is the ones that matter.
Cleveland-Akronarea,showninredcross-hatch.
Area All-Time Peak Load (MW) Load on August 14, 2003 (MW)
Cleveland-Akron Area
(including Cleveland Public Power) 7,340 6,715
FirstEnergy Control Area, Ohio 13,299 12,165
FirstEnergy Retail Area, including PJM 24,267 22,631
NA = not applicable.
24  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

electricity transactions, taking transmission ele- August 11 and 14. Figure 4.2 shows forecast and
mentsoutofserviceorrestoringthem,andifnec- actual power demands for AEP, Michigan Electri-
essary, shedding interruptible and firm customer cal Coordinated Systems (MECS), and FE from
load—i.e., cutting some customers off tempo- August 11 through August 14. Variances between
rarily, and in the right locations, to reduce elec- actual and forecast loads are not unusual, but
tricity demand to a level that matches what the because those forecasts are used for day-ahead
system is then able to deliver safely. planning for generation, purchases, and reactive
power management, they can affect equipment
This chapter discusses system conditions in and
availability and schedules for the following day.
aroundnortheastOhioonAugust14andtheirrel-
evance to the blackout. It reviews electric loads Theexistenceofhighairconditioningloadsacross
(realandreactive),systemtopology(transmission the Midwest on August 14 is relevant because air
and generation equipment availability and capa- conditioning loads (like other induction motors)
bilities),powerflows,voltageprofilesandreactive have lower power factors than other customer
power reserves. The discussion examines actual electricity uses, and consume more reactive
system data, investigation team modeling results, power.Becauseithadbeenhotforseveraldaysin
and past FE and AEP experiences in the Cleve- the Cleveland-Akron area, more air conditioners
land-Akron area. The detailed analyses will be wererunningtoovercomethepersistentheat,and
presented in a NERC technical report. consuming relatively high levels of reactive
power—further straining the area’s limited reac-
Electric Demands on August 14 tive generation capabilities.
TemperaturesonAugust14werehotbutinanor-
Generation Facilities Unavailable
mal range throughout the northeast region of the
on August 14
United States and in eastern Canada (Figure 4.1).
Electricitydemandswerehighduetohighaircon-
ditioning loads typical of warm days in August, Several key generators in the region were out of
though not unusually so. As the temperature service going into the day of August 14. On any
increased from 78°F (26°C) on August 11 to given day, some generation and transmission
87°F (31°C) on August 14, peak load within capacity is unavailable; some facilities are out for
FirstEnergy’scontrolareaincreasedby20%,from routinemaintenance,andothershavebeenforced
10,095 MW to 12,165 MW. System operators had out by an unanticipated breakdown and require
successfully managed higher demands in north- repairs.August14,2003,innortheastOhiowasno
east Ohio and across the Midwest, both earlier in exception (Table 4.1).
the summer and in previous years—historic peak
The generating units that were not available on
loadforFE’scontrolareawas13,299MW.August
August14providerealandreactivepowerdirectly
14 was FE’s peak demand day in 2003.
totheCleveland,Toledo,andDetroitareas.Under
Several large operators in the Midwest consis- standard practice, system operators take into
tently under-forecasted load levels between account the unavailability of such units and any
Figure 4.1. August 2003 Temperatures in the U.S. Figure 4.2. Load Forecasts Below Actuals,
Northeast and Eastern Canada August 11 through 14
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  25

transmission facilities known to be out of service determined that the regional system could be
intheday-aheadplanningstudiestheyperformto operatedsafely.Theunavailabilityofthesegener-
ensureasecuresystemforthenextday.Knowing ation units did not cause the blackout.
the status of key facilities also helps operators
On August 14 four or five capacitor banks within
determine in advance the safe electricity transfer
theCleveland-Akronareahadbeenremovedfrom
levels for the coming day.
serviceforroutineinspection,includingcapacitor
MISO’sday-aheadplanningstudiesforAugust14 banks at Fox and Avon 138-kV substations.1
tooktheabovegeneratoroutagesandtransmission These static reactive power sources are important
outages reported to MISO into account and for voltage support, but were not restored to
Table 4.1. Generators Not Available on August 14
Generator Rating Reason
Davis-Besse Nuclear Unit 883 MW Prolonged NRC-ordered outage beginning on 3/22/02
Sammis Unit 3 180 MW Forced outage on 8/12/03
Eastlake Unit 4 238 MW Forced outage on 8/13/03
Monroe Unit 1 817 MW Planned outage, taken out of service on 8/8/03
Cook Nuclear Unit 2 1,060 MW Outage began on 8/13/03
Load Power Factors and Reactive Power
Load power factor is a measure of the relative power. Reactive power is consumed within
magnitudes of real power and reactive power transmission lines in proportion to the square of
consumedbytheloadconnectedtoapowersys- theelectriccurrentshipped,soa10%increaseof
tem.Resistiveload,suchaselectricspaceheaters power transfer will require a 21% increase in
or incandescent lights, consumes only real reactive power generation to support the power
power and no reactive power and has a load transfer.
powerfactorof1.0.Inductionmotors,whichare
In metropolitan areas with summer peaking
widely used in manufacturing processes, min-
loads, it is generally recognized that as tempera-
ing,andhomes(e.g.,air-conditioners,fanmotors
tures and humidity increase, load demand
