North American bulk power system. Funding
with appropriate U.S. authorities to complete a
NERC and the councils through a transmission
framework to ensure that identical or compatible
rate surcharge administered and disbursed under
standardsapplyinbothcountries,andthatmeans
regulatorysupervisionwouldenabletheorganiza-
are in place to enforce them in all interconnected
tionstobemoreindependentoftheindustry,with
jurisdictions.
little impact on electric bills. The dues that com-
D. Joint Actions by U.S. and Canadian panies pay to the regional councils are passed
Governments through to electricity customers today, so the net
impacts on customer bills from shifting to a rate
Internationalcoordinationmechanismsshouldbe
surcharge would be minimal.
developed between the governments in Canada
and the United States to provide for government Implementation of the recommendations pre-
oversight of NERC or the ERO, and approval and sented in this report will involve a substantial
enforcement of reliability standards. increaseinNERC’sfunctionsandresponsibilities,
andrequireanincreaseinNERC’sannualbudget.
E. Memoranda of Understanding between U.S.
The additional costs, however, would be small in
or Canadian Government Agencies and
comparisontothecostofasinglemajorblackout.
NERC
Government agencies in both countries should
decide(individually)whethertodevelopamemo- 3. Strengthen the institutional framework
randum of understanding (MOU) with NERC that for reliability management in North
would define the agency’s working relationship America.7
withNERC,governmentoversightofNERCactivi-
tiesifappropriate,andthereliabilityresponsibili- FERC,DOEandappropriateauthoritiesinCanada
shouldworkwiththestates,NERC,andtheindus-
ties of the signatories.
try,toevaluateanddevelopappropriatemodifica-
tionstotheexistinginstitutionalframeworkfor
2. Develop a regulator-approved mecha-
reliabilitymanagement.Inparticular,theaffected
nism for funding NERC and the regional governmentagenciesshould:
reliability councils, to ensure their inde-
A. Commissionanindependentreviewbyquali-
pendence from the parties they oversee.6
fiedexpertsinorganizationaldesignandman-
U.S.andCanadianregulatoryauthoritiesshould agementtoaddressissuesconcerninghowbest
workwithNERC,theregionalcouncils,andthe tostructureaninternationalreliabilityorgani-
industrytodevelopandimplementanewfunding zationforthelongterm.
mechanismforNERCandtheregionalcouncils
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  143

B. Basedinpartontheresultsofthatreview, sizesandresources.Somehavegrownfromareli-
developmetricsforgaugingtheadequacyof ability council into an ISO or RTO (ERCOT and
NERC’sperformance,andspecifythefunctions SPP),somespanlessthanasinglestate(FRCCand
oftheNERCBoardofTrusteesandtheproce-
ERCOT)whileotherscovermanystatesandprov-
dureforselectingthemembersoftheBoard.
inces and cross national boundaries (NPCC and
WECC). Several cross reliability coordinator
C. Examineandclarifythefutureroleofthe
regionalreliabilitycouncils,withparticular boundaries. It is time to evaluate the appropriate
attentiontotheirmandate,scope,structure, size and scope of a regional council, the specific
responsibilities,andresourcerequirements. tasks that it should perform, and the appropriate
level of resources, expertise, and independence
D. ExamineNERC’sproposedFunctionalModel
thataregionalreliabilitycouncilneedstoperform
andsetminimumrequirementsunderwhich
those tasks effectively. This evaluation should
NERCwouldcertifyapplicants’qualifications
also address whether the councils as currently
toperformcriticalfunctions.
constitutedareappropriatetomeetfuturereliabil-
E. RequestNERCandtheregionalcouncilstosus- ity needs.
penddesignationofanynewcontrolareas(or
D. NERC’s Functional Model
sub-controlareas)untiltheminimumrequire-
mentsinsectionD(above)havebeenestab- The transition to competition in wholesale power
lished,unlessanapplicantshowsthatsuch markets has been accompanied by increasing
designationwouldsignificantlyenhancereli- diversityinthekindsofentitiesthatneedtobein
ability. compliancewithreliabilitystandards.Ratherthan
resist or attempt to influence this evolution,
F. Determinewaystoenhancereliabilityopera-
NERC’s response—through the Functional
tionsintheUnitedStatesthroughsimplified
Model—hasbeentoseekameansofenablingreli-
organizationalboundariesandresolutionof
seamsissues. abilitytobemaintainedundervirtuallyanyinsti-
tutional framework. The Functional Model
identifies sixteen basic functions associated with
A and B. Reshaping NERC
operating the bulk electric systems and maintain-
The far-reaching organizational changes in the
ing reliability, and the capabilities that an organi-
North American electricity industry over the past
zation must have in order to perform a given
decadehavealreadyinducedmajorchangesinthe
function. (See Functional Model text box below.)
nature of NERC as an organization. However, the
process of change at NERC is far from complete. NERC acknowledges that maintaining reliability
Important additional changes are needed such as insomeframeworksmaybemoredifficultormore
theshifttoenforceablestandards,developmentof expensive than in others, but it stresses that as
an effective monitoring capability, and funding long as some responsible party addresses each
that is not dependent on the industry. These functionandtherulesarefollowed,reliabilitywill
changeswillstrengthenNERCasanorganization. bepreserved.Byimplication,theprosandconsof
In turn, to properly serve overarching public pol- alternative institutional frameworks in a given
icy concerns, this strengthening of NERC’s capa- region—which may affect aspects of electric
bilities will have to be balanced with increased industry operations other than reliability—are
government oversight, more specific metrics for matters for government agencies to address, not
gauging NERC’s performance as an organization, NERC.
andgreatertransparencyconcerningthefunctions
One of the major purposes of the Functional
of its senior management team (including its
Model is to create a vehicle through which NERC
Board of Trustees) and the procedures by which
will be able to identify an entity responsible for
those individuals are selected. The affected gov-
performingeachfunctionineverypartofthethree
ernment agencies should jointly commission an
North American interconnections. NERC consid-
independent review of these and related issues to
ers four of the sixteen functions to be especially
aid them in making their respective decisions.
critical for reliability. For these functions, NERC
intends, upon application by an entity, to review
C. The Role of the Regional Reliability Councils theentity’scapabilities,andifappropriate,certify
NorthAmerica’sregionalreliabilitycouncilshave that the entity has the qualifications to perform
evolved into a disparate group of organizations thatfunctionwithinthespecifiedgeographicarea.
with varying responsibilities, expertise, roles, For the other twelve functions, NERC proposes to
144  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

“register” entities as responsible for a given func- critical functions for their respective areas. In
tion in a given area, upon application. other areas, capabilities may remain less aggre-
gated, and the institutional structure may remain
All sixteen functions are presently being per-
more complex.
formedtovaryingdegreesbyoneentityoranother
todayinallareasofNorthAmerica.Frequentlyan Working with NERC and the industry, FERC and
entity performs a combination of functions, but authorities in Canada should review the Func-
thereisgreatvarietyfromoneregiontoanotherin tional Model to ensure that operating hierarchies
how the functions are bundled and carried out. and entities will facilitate, rather than hinder,
Whether all of the parties who are presently per- efficient reliability operations. At a minimum,
forming the four critical functions would meet thereviewshouldidentifywaystoeliminateinap-
NERC’s requirements for certification is not propriate commercial incentives to retain control
known, but the proposed process provides a area status that do not support reliability objec-
means of identifying any weaknesses that need to tives; address operational problems associated
be rectified. with institutional fragmentation; and set mini-
mumrequirementswithrespecttothecapabilities
Atpresent,afterprotracteddebate,theFunctional
requiring NERC certification, concerning subjects
Modelappearstohavegainedwidespreadbutcau-
such as:
tious support from the diverse factions across the
industry, while the regulators have not taken a 1.Fully operational backup control rooms.
position. In some parts of North America, such as
2.System-wide (or wider) electronic map boards
the Northeast, large regional organizations will
or functional equivalents, with data feeds that
probably be certified to perform all four of the
areindependentofthearea’smainenergyman-
agement system (EMS).
Sixteen Functions in NERC’s Functional
Model 3.Real-time tools that are to be available to the
operator, with backups. (See Recommendation
  Operating Reliability
22 below for more detail concerning minimum
  Planning Reliability
requirementsandguidelinesforreal-timeoper-
  Balancing (generation and demand) ating tools.)
  Interchange
4.SCADA and EMS requirements, including
  Transmission service backup capabilities.
  Transmission ownership
5.Training programs for all personnel who have
  Transmission operations
accesstoacontrolroomorsupervisoryrespon-
  Transmission planning sibilities for control room operations. (See Rec-
  Resource planning ommendation 19 for more detail on the Task
Force’s views regarding training and certifica-
  Distribution
tion requirements.)
  Generator ownership
  Generator operations 6.Certification requirements for control room
managers and staff.
  Load serving
  Purchasing and selling E. Designation of New Control Areas
  Standards development Significant changes in the minimum functional
requirements for control areas (or balancing
  Compliance monitoring
authorities, in the context of the Functional
NERC regards the four functions shown above Model) may result from the review called for
in bold as especially critical to reliability. above. Accordingly, the Task Force recommends
Accordingly, it proposes to certify applicants that regulatory authorities should request NERC
thatcandemonstratethattheyhavethecapabil- and the regional councils not to certify any new
ities required to perform those functions. The control areas (or sub-control areas) until the
Operating Reliability authority would corre- appropriate regulatory bodies have approved the
spondtotoday’sreliabilitycoordinator,andthe minimum functional requirements for such bod-
Balancing authority to today’s control area ies, unless an applicant shows that such designa-
operator. tion would significantly enhance reliability.
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  145

F. Boundary and Seam Issues and Minimum FERCandappropriateauthoritiesinCanada
Functional Requirements shouldclarifythatprudentexpendituresand
investmentsbyregulatedcompaniestomaintainor
Some observers believe that some U.S. regions improvebulksystemreliabilitywillberecoverable
have too many control areas performing one or throughtransmissionrates.
more of the four critical reliability functions.
IntheU.S.,FERCandDOEshouldworkwithstate
In many cases, these entities exist to retain com-
regulatorstoidentifyandresolveissuesrelatedto
mercial advantages associated with some of these therecoveryofreliabilitycostsandinvestments
functions. The resulting institutional fragmenta- throughretailrates.Appropriateauthoritiesin
tion and decentralization of control leads to a Canadashoulddeterminewhethersimilarefforts
higher number of operating contacts and seams, arewarranted.
complex coordination requirements, misalign-
mentofcontrolareaswithotherelectricalbound- Companies will not make the expenditures and
aries and/or operating hierarchies, inconsistent investments required to maintain or improve the
practices and tools, and increased compliance reliabilityofthebulkpowersystemwithoutcredi-
monitoring requirements. These consequences ble assurances that they will be able to recover
hamper the efficiency and reliability of grid their costs.
operations.
5. Track implementation of recommended
As shown above (text box on page 14), MISO, as actions to improve reliability.9
reliabilitycoordinatorforitsregion,isresponsible
IntherequirementsissuedonFebruary10,2004,
for dealing with 37 control areas, whereas PJM NERCannouncedthatitandtheregionalcouncils
now spans 9 control areas, ISO-New England has wouldestablishaprogramfordocumentingcom-
2, and the New York ISO, Ontario’s IMO, Texas’ pletionofrecommendationsresultingfromthe
ERCOT, and Québec’s Trans-Energie are them- August14blackoutandotherhistoricaloutages,as
selves the control area operators for their respec- wellasNERCandregionalreportsonviolationsof
tivelargeareas.Moreover,itisnotclearthatsmall reliabilitystandards,resultsofcomplianceaudits,
andlessonslearnedfromsystemdisturbances.The
control areas are financially able to provide the
regionsaretoreportonaquarterlybasistoNERC.
facilities and services needed to perform control
areafunctionsatthelevelneededtomaintainreli- Inaddition,NERCintendstoinitiatebyJanuary1,
ability.Thisconcernappliesalsotothefourtypes 2005areliabilityperformancemonitoringfunction
ofentitiesthatNERCproposestocertifyunderthe thatwillevaluateandreportontrendsinbulk
Functional Model (i.e., Reliability Authority, electricsystemreliabilityperformance.
Planning Authority, Balancing Authority, and
TheTaskForcesupportstheseactionsstrongly.
Interchange Authority).
However,manyoftheTaskForce’srecommenda-
tionspertaintogovernmentbodiesaswellas
For the long term, the regulatory agencies should NERC.Accordingly:
continue to seek ways to ensure that the regional
A. RelevantagenciesintheU.S.andCanada
operational frameworks that emerge through the shouldcooperatetoestablishmechanismsfor
implementationoftheFunctionalModelpromote trackingandreportingtothepubliconimple-
reliable operations. Any operational framework mentationactionsintheirrespectiveareasof
will represent some combination of tradeoffs, but responsibility.
reliability is a critically important public policy
B. NERCshoulddrawontheabove-mentioned
objective and should be a primary design
quarterlyreportsfromitsregionalcouncilsto
criterion.
prepareannualreportstoFERC,appropriate
authoritiesinCanada,andthepubliconthe
statusoftheindustry’scompliancewithrecom-
4. Clarify that prudent expenditures and
mendationsandimportanttrendsinelectric
investments for bulk system reliability
systemreliabilityperformance.
(including investments in new technolo-
gies) will be recoverable through trans- The August 14 blackout shared a number of con-
mission rates.8 tributing factors with prior large-scale blackouts,
146  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

confirmingthatthelessonsandrecommendations suits;and2)affirmpubliclythatactionstoshed
from earlier blackouts had not been adequately loadpursuanttosuchguidelinesarenotindicative
implemented, at least in some geographic areas. ofoperatorfailure.
Accordingly, parallel and coordinated efforts are
Timely and sufficient action to shed load on
needed by the relevant government agencies and
August14wouldhavepreventedthespreadofthe
NERC to track the implementation of recommen-
blackout beyond northern Ohio. NERC has
dationsbygovernmentsandtheelectricityindus-
directed all the regional councils in all areas of
try. WECC and NPCC have already established
NorthAmericatoreviewtheapplicabilityofplans
programs that could serve as models for tracking
for under-voltage load shedding, and to support
implementation of recommendations.
the development of such capabilities where they
would be beneficial. However, organizations and
individual operators may hesitate to initiate such
6. FERC should not approve the operation
actions in appropriate circumstances without
of a new RTO or ISO until the applicant
assurancesthattheywillnotbesubjecttoliability
has met the minimum functional
