during the summer of 2004. proval of any change in the amount of re-
quired load reduction capability. It also rec-
Task Force:
ommends that NERC require FE’s load reduc-
Recommends that NERC also require FE to
tion plan to be shared with the Ohio Public
confirm that all non-utility generators in its
UtilitiesCommissionandthatFEshouldcom-
areahaveenteredintocontractsforthesaleof
municatewithallcommunitiesintheaffected
generation committing them to producing in-
areas about the plan and its potential conse-
creased or maximum reactive power when
quences.
calleduponbyFEorMISOtodoso.Suchcon-
tractsshouldensurethatthegeneratorwould
7. Emergency Response Plan
be compensated for revenue losses associated
NERC:
with a reduction in real power sales in order
Required that FE develop an emergency re-
to increase production of reactive power.
sponse plan, including arrangements for de-
ploying the load reduction capabilities noted
5. Operational Preparedness and Action Plan
above.Theplanistoincludecriteriafordeter-
NERC: mining the existence of an emergency and
Required that FE prepare and submit to ECAR identify various possible states of emergency.
an Operational Preparedness and Action Plan Theplanistoincludedetailedoperatingproce-
to ensure system security and full compliance dures and communication protocols with all
with NERC and planning and operating crite- therelevantentitiesincludingMISO,FEopera-
ria, including ECAR Document 1. tors, and market participants within the FE
Task Force: areathathaveanabilitytovarygenerationout-
RecommendsthatNERCrequirecopiesofthis put or shed load upon orders from FE opera-
plan to be provided to FERC, DOE, the Ohio tors. The plan should include procedures for
Public Utility Commission, and the public load restoration after the declaration that the
utility commissions in other states in which FEsystemisnolongerinanemergencyoperat-
FEoperates.TheTaskForcealsorecommends ing state.
thatNERCrequireFEtoinviteitssystemoper- Task Force:
ationspartners—controlareasadjacenttoFE, RecommendsthatNERCrequireFEtoofferits
plusMISO,ECAR,andPJM—toparticipatein system operations partners—i.e., control ar-
the development of the plan and agree to its eas adjacent to FE, plus MISO, ECAR, and
implementationinallaspectsthatcouldaffect PJM—an opportunity to contribute to the de-
their respective systems and operations. velopmentoftheplanandagreetoitskeypro-
visions.
6. Emergency Response Resources
8. Operator Communications
NERC:
RequiredthatFEdevelopacapabilitytoreduce NERC:
load in the Cleveland-Akron area by 1500 MW RequiredthatFEdevelopcommunicationspro-
within ten minutes of a directive to do so by cedures for FE operating personnel to use
MISO or the FE system operator. Such a within FE, with MISO and neighboring
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  151

systems,andothers.Theprocedureandtheop- 11.Emergency Preparedness Training for
eratingenvironmentwithintheFEsystemcon- Operators
trol center should allow control room staff to
NERC:
focus on reliable system operations and avoid
Required that all reliability coordinators, con-
distractions such as calls from customers and
trol areas, and transmission operators provide
otherswhoarenotresponsibleforoperationof
atleastfivedaysoftraininganddrillsusingre-
a portion of the transmission system.
alistic simulation of system emergencies for
Task Force: each staff person with responsibility for the
Recommends that NERC require these proce- real-time operation or reliability monitoring of
durestobesharedwithandagreedtobycon- the bulk electric system. This system emer-
trol areas adjacent to FE, plus MISO, ECAR, gency training is in addition to other training
andPJM,andanyotheraffectedsystemopera- requirements. The term “realistic simulation”
tions partners, and that these procedures be includes a variety of tools and methods that
tested in a joint drill. present operating personnel with situations to
improve and test diagnostic and decision-
9. Reliability Monitoring and System Manage- makingskillsinanenvironmentthatresembles
ment Tools expectedconditionsduringaparticulartypeof
system emergency.
NERC:
Task Force:
RequiredthatFEensurethatitsstateestimator
Recommendsthattoprovideeffectivetraining
and real-time contingency analysis functions
beforeJune30,2004,NERCshouldrequireFE
are used to execute reliably full contingency
to consider seeking the assistance of another
analysesautomaticallyeverytenminutesoron
control area or reliability coordinator known
demand,andusedtonotifyoperatorsofpoten-
to have a quality training program (such as
tial first contingency violations.
IMO or ISO-New England) to provide the
Task Force:
needed training with appropriate FE-specific
RecommendsthatNERCalsorequireFEtoen-
modifications.
sure that its information technology support
function does not change the effectiveness of
B. Corrective Actions to be Completed by MISO
reliabilitymonitoringormanagementtoolsin
by June 30, 2004
any way without the awareness and consent
of its system operations staff. 1. Reliability Tools
NERC:
Required that MISO fully implement and test
10.GE XA21 System Updates and Transition to
its topology processor to provide its operating
New Energy Management System
personnelareal-timeviewofthesystemstatus
NERC: foralltransmissionlinesoperatingandallgen-
RequiredthatuntilFEreplacesitsGEXA21En- erating units within its system, and all critical
ergy Management System, FE should imple- transmission lines and generating units in
ment all current known fixes for the GE XA21 neighboring systems. Alarms should be pro-
system necessary to ensure reliable and stable vided for operators for all critical transmission
operation of critical reliability functions, and line outages and voltage violations. MISO is to
particularlytocorrectthealarmprocessorfail- establish a means of exchanging outage infor-
ure that occurred on August 14, 2003. mationwithitsmembersandadjacentsystems
Task Force: suchthattheMISOstateestimatorhasaccurate
Recommends that NERC require FE to design andtimelyinformationtoperformasdesigned.
and test the transition to its planned new en- MISOistofullyimplementandtestitsstatees-
ergy management system to ensure that the timation and real-time contingency analysis
system functions effectively, that the transi- toolstoensuretheycanoperatereliablynoless
tionismadesmoothly,thatthesystem’soper- than every ten minutes. MISO is to provide
ators are adequately trained, and that all op- backup capability for all functions critical to
erating partners are aware of the transition. reliability.
152  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

Task Force: ECAR should consult with an expert team ap-
Recommends that NERC require MISO to en- pointed by NERC—joined by representatives
sure that its information technology support from FERC, DOE, interested state commis-
staff does not change the effectiveness of reli- sions, and MISO—to develop better modeling
ability monitoring or management tools in procedures and scenarios, and obtain review
any way without the awareness and consent of future assessments by the expert team.
of its system operations staff.
2. Verification of Data and Assumptions
2. Operating Agreements Task Force:
NERC: Recommends that NERC require ECAR to re-
Required that MISO reevaluate its operating examine and validate all data and model as-
agreements with member entities to verify its sumptions against current physical asset ca-
authority to address operating issues, includ- pabilities and match modeled assets (such as
ing voltage and reactive management, voltage linecharacteristicsandratings,andgenerator
scheduling, the deployment and redispatch of reactive power output capabilities) to current
real and reactive reserves for emergency re- operating study assessments.
sponse,andtheauthoritytodirectactionsdur-
ing system emergencies, including shedding 3. Ensure Consistency of Members’ Data
load. Task Force:
Task Force: RecommendsthatNERCrequireECARtocon-
Recommends that NERC require that any duct a data validation and exchange exercise
problems or concerns related to these operat- tobesurethatitsmembersareusingaccurate,
ing issues be raised promptly with FERC and consistent,andcurrentphysicalassetcharac-
MISO’s members for resolution. teristics and capabilities for both long-term
andseasonalassessmentsandoperatingstud-
C. Corrective Actions to be Completed by PJM ies.
by June 30, 2004
NERC: E. Task Force Recommendation for Corrective
Required that PJM reevaluate and improve its Actions to be Completed by Other Parties by
communications protocols and procedures be- June 30, 2004
tween PJM and its neighboring control areas Task Force:
and reliability coordinators. Recommends that NERC require each North
Task Force: American reliability coordinator, reliability
Recommends that NERC require definitions council, control area, and transmission com-
and usages of key terms be standardized, and pany not directly addressed above to review
non-essential communications be minimized the actions required above and determine
during disturbances, alerts, or emergencies. whether it has adequate system facilities, op-
NERC should also require PJM, MISO, and erational procedures, tools, and training to
their member companies to conduct one or ensure reliable operations for the summer of
more joint drills using the new communica- 2004. If any entity finds that improvements
tions procedures. are needed, it should immediately undertake
the needed improvements, and coordinate
themwithitsneighborsandpartnersasneces-
D. Task Force Recommendations for Corrective
sary.
Actions to be Completed by ECAR by August
The Task Force also recommends that FERC
14, 2004
and government agencies in Canada require
1. Modeling and Assessments all entities under their jurisdiction who are
Task Force: users of GE/Harris XA21 Energy Management
Recommends that NERC require ECAR to re- Systemstoconsultthevendorandensurethat
evaluate its modeling procedures, assump- appropriate actions have been taken to avert
tions, scenarios and data for seasonal assess- any recurrence of the malfunction that oc-
ments and extreme conditions evaluations. curred on FE’s system on August 14.
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  153

16. Establish enforceable standards for A. Enforceable Standards
maintenance of electrical clearances in NERCshouldworkwithFERC,governmentagen-
right-of-way areas.22 ciesinCanada,stateregulatoryagencies,theInsti-
tute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE),
OnFebruary10,theNERCBoarddirectedthe
utility arborists, and other experts from the U.S.
NERCComplianceProgramandtheregionalcoun-
and Canada to develop clear, unambiguous stan-
cilstoinitiateajointprogramforreportingall
dardspertainingtomaintenanceofsafeclearances
bulkelectricsystemtransmissionlinetripsresult-
ingfromvegetationcontact.Basedontheresultsof of transmission lines from obstructions in the
thesefilings,NERCistoconsiderthedevelopment lines’ right-of-way areas, and procedures to verify
ofminimumlineclearancestandardstoensure compliancewiththestandards.States,provinces,
reliability. and local governments should remain free to set
more specific or higher standards as they deem
TheTaskForcebelievesthatmoreaggressive
necessary for their respective areas.
actioniswarranted.NERCshouldworkwith
FERC,appropriateauthoritiesinCanada,statereg-
B. Right-of-Way Management Plan
ulatoryagencies,theInstituteofElectricaland
NERC should require each bulk electric transmis-
ElectronicEngineers(IEEE),utilityarborists,and
otherexpertsfromtheUSandCanadatodevelop sion operator to publish annually a proposed
clear,unambiguousstandardspertainingtomain- right-of-way management plan on its public
tenanceofsafeclearancesoftransmissionlines website, and a report on its right-of-way manage-
fromobstructionsinthelines’right-of-wayareas, mentactivitiesforthepreviousyear.Themanage-
andtodevelopamechanismtoverifycompliance ment plan should include the planned frequency
withthestandardsandimposepenaltiesfornon- of actions such as right-of-way trimming, herbi-
compliance.
cide treatment, and inspections, and the report
should give the dates when the rights-of-way in a
Ineffective vegetation management was a major given district were last inspected and corrective
cause of the August 14, 2003, blackout and it was actions taken.
also a causal factor in other large-scale North
C. Requirement to Report Outages Due to
American outages such as those that occurred in
Ground Faults in Right-of-Way Areas
the summer of 1996 in the western United States.
Maintaining transmission line rights-of-way, Beginning with an effective date of March 31,
including maintaining safe clearances of ener- 2004, NERC should require each transmission
gizedlinesfromvegetation,man-madestructures, owner/operator to submit quarterly reports of all
bird nests, etc., requires substantial expenditures ground-fault line trips, including their causes, on
in many areas of North America. However, such lines of 115 kV and higher in its footprint to the
maintenanceisacriticalinvestmentforensuringa regional councils. Failure to report such trips
reliable electric system. For a review of current should lead to an appropriate penalty. Each
issues pertaining to utility vegetation manage- regional council should assemble a detailed
ment programs, see Utility Vegetation Manage- annual report on ground fault line trips and their
ment Final Report, March 2004.23 causes in its area to FERC, NERC, DOE, appropri-
ate authorities in Canada, and state regulators no
NERC does not presently have standards for later than March 31 for the preceding year, with
right-of-way maintenance. However, it has stan- thefirstannualreporttobefiledinMarch2005for
dardsrequiringthatlineratingsbesettomaintain calendar year 2004.
safe clearances from all obstructions. Line rating
D. Transmission-Related Vegetation Manage-
standards should be reviewed to ensure that they
ment Expenses, if Prudently Incurred,
are sufficiently clear and explicit. In the United
Should be Recoverable through Electric
States, National Electrical Safety Code (NESC)
Rates
rules specify safety clearances required for over-
headconductorsfromgroundedobjectsandother The level of activity in vegetation management
typesofobstructions,butthoserulesaresubjectto programs in many utilities and states has fluctu-
broad interpretation. Several states have adopted atedwidelyfromyeartoyear,dueinparttoincon-
theirownelectricalsafetycodesandsimilarcodes sistentfundingandvaryingmanagementsupport.
apply in Canada and its provinces. A mechanism Utility managers and regulators should recognize
isneededtoverifycompliancewiththeserequire- the importance of effective vegetation manage-
ments and to penalize noncompliance. ment to transmission system reliability, and that
154  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

changesinvegetationmanagementmaybeneeded regulatory authorities in the United States and
in response to weather, insect infestations, and Canada.
other factors. Transmission vegetation manage- Task Force:
mentprogramsshouldbeconsistentlyfundedand Recommends that NERC inform the federal
proactively managed to maintain and improve and state or provincial authorities of both
system reliability. countries of the final results of all enforce-
ment proceedings, and make the results of
such proceedings public.
17. Strengthen the NERC Compliance
Enforcement Program.
C. Violations in August 14, 2003 Blackout
OnFebruary10,2004,theNERCBoardofTrustees
NERC:
approveddirectivestotheregionalreliability
The Compliance and Standards investigation
councilsthatwillsignificantlystrengthenNERC’s
teamwillissueafinalreportinMarchorApril
existingComplianceEnforcementProgram.The
TaskForcesupportsthesedirectivesstrongly,and of 2004 of violations of NERC and regional
recommendscertainadditionalactions,as standards that occurred on August 14. (Seven
describedbelow.24 violations are noted in this report (pages 19-
20),butadditionalviolationsmaybeidentified
A. Reporting of Violations
byNERC.)Withinthreemonthsoftheissuance
NERC: ofthereport,NERCistodeveloprecommenda-
Requires each regional council to report to the tions to improve the compliance process.
NERC Compliance Enforcement Program
Task Force:
withinonemonthofoccurrenceall“significant
Recommends that NERC make its recommen-
violations” of NERC operating policies and
dations available to appropriate U.S. federal
planning standards and regional standards,
and state authorities, to appropriate authori-
