The nuclear power plant outages that resulted in detail. Two additional requests for more spe-
fromtheAugust14,2003,poweroutageweretrig- cific information were made for certain plants.
gered by automatic protection systems for the The collection of information from U.S. nuclear
reactors or turbine-generators, not by any manual power plants was gathered through the NRC
operatoractions.TheNWGhasreceivednoinfor- regional offices, which had NRC resident inspec-
mation that points to operators deliberately shut- tors at each plant obtain licensee information to
tingdownnuclearunitstoisolatethemselvesfrom answerthequestions.Generaldesigninformation
instabilities on the grid. In short, only automatic was gathered from plant-specific Updated Final
separation of nuclear units occurred. Safety Analysis Reports and other documents.
Regarding the 95 other licensed commercial Plantdatawerecomparedagainstplantdesignsby
nuclear power plants in the United States: 4 were the NRC staff to determine whether the plant
alreadyshutdownatthetimeofthepoweroutage, responses were as expected; whether they
one of which experienced a grid disturbance; 70 appearedtocausethepoweroutageorcontributed
operating plants observed some level of grid dis- to the spread of the outage; and whether applica-
turbancebutaccommodatedthedisturbancesand ble safety requirements were met. In some cases
remainedonline,supplyingpowertothegrid;and supplemental questions were developed, and
21 operating plants did not experience any grid answers were obtained from the licensees to clar-
disturbance. ify the observed response of the plant. The NWG
interfaced with the ESWG to validate some data
Introduction andtoobtaingridinformation,whichcontributed
to the analysis. The NWG identified relevant
The NRC, which regulates U.S. commercial
actionsbynucleargeneratingfacilitiesinconnec-
nuclearpowerplants,hasregulatoryrequirements
tion with the power outage.
for offsite power systems. These requirements
address the number of offsite power sources and
Typical Design, Operational, and
the ability to withstand certain transients. Offsite
Protective Features of U.S. Nuclear
power is the normal source of alternating current
Power Plants
(AC) power to the safety systems in the plants
whentheplantmaingeneratorisnotinoperation.
Nuclear power plants have a number of design,
The requirements also are designed to protect
operational,andprotectivefeaturestoensurethat
safety systems from potentially damaging varia-
theplantsoperatesafelyandreliably.Thissection
tions (in voltage and frequency) in the supplied
describes these features so as to provide a better
power. For loss of offsite power events, the NRC
understandingofhownuclearpowerplantsinter-
requires emergency generation (typically emer-
act with the grid and, specifically, how nuclear
gency diesel generators) to provide AC power to
powerplantsrespondtochanginggridconditions.
safety systems. In addition, the NRC provides
While the features described in this section are
oversight of the safety aspects of offsite power
typical, there are differences in the design and
issues through its inspection program, by moni-
operation of individual plants which are not
toring operating experience, and by performing
discussed.
technical studies.
Design Features of U.S. Nuclear Power Plants
Phase I: Fact Finding
Nuclear power plants use heat from nuclear reac-
Phase I of the NWG effort focused on collecting tions to generate steam and use a single steam-
and analyzing data from each plant to determine driven turbine-generator (also known as the main
what happened, and whether any activities at the generator) to produce electricity supplied to the
plants caused or contributed to the power outage grid.
oritsspreadorinvolvedasignificantsafetyissue.
Connection of the plant switchyard to the grid.
To ensure accuracy, comprehensive coordination
Theplantswitchyardnormallyformstheinterface
was maintained among the working group mem-
between the plant main generator and the electri-
bers and among the NWG, ESWG, and SWG.
calgrid.Theplantswitchyardhasmultipletrans-
Thestaffdevelopedasetoftechnicalquestionsto missionlinesconnectedtothegridsystemtomeet
obtain data from the owners or licensees of the offsitepowersupplyrequirementsforhavingreli-
nuclear power plants that would enable them to able offsite power for the nuclear station under
review the response of the nuclear plant systems all operating and shutdown conditions. Each
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  113

transmissionlineconnectedtotheswitchyardhas power (MVAr) from the generator to the
dedicated circuit breakers, with fault sensors, to switchyardandouttothesurroundinggrid,help-
isolatefaultedconditionsintheswitchyardorthe ing to control the grid voltage decrease. If the
connected transmission lines, such as phase-to- switchyard voltage goes low enough, the
phaseorphase-to-groundshortcircuits.Thefault increased generator field current could result in
sensors are fed into a protection scheme for the generator field overheating. Over-excitation pro-
plant switchyard that is engineered to localize tective circuitry is generally employed to prevent
any faulted conditions with minimum system thisfromoccurring.Thisprotectivecircuitrymay
disturbance. trip the generator to prevent equipment damage.
Connection of the main generator to the switch- Under-voltage protection is provided for the
yard. The plant main generator produces electri- nuclearpowerplantsafetybuses,andmaybepro-
cal power and transmits that power to the offsite videdonnonsafetybusesandatindividualpieces
transmission system. Most plants also supply of equipment. It is also used in some pressurized
power to the plant auxiliary buses for normal water reactor designs on reactor coolant pumps
operation of the nuclear generating unit through (RCPs) as an anticipatory loss of RCP flow signal.
the unit auxiliary transformer. During normal
plantoperation,themaingeneratortypicallygen- Protective Features of U.S. Nuclear Power
erateselectricalpoweratabout22kV.Thevoltage Plants
is increased to match the switchyard voltage by
Themaingeneratorandmainturbinehaveprotec-
themaintransformers,andthepowerflowstothe
tive features, similar to fossil generating stations,
high voltage switchyard through two power cir-
which protect against equipment damage. In gen-
cuit breakers.
eral,thereactorprotectivefeaturesaredesignedto
Powersuppliesfortheplantauxiliarybuses.The protectthereactorfuelfromdamageandtoprotect
safety-related and nonsafety auxiliary buses are the reactor coolant system from over-pressure or
normallylineduptoreceivepowerfromthemain over-temperature transients. Some trip features
generator auxiliary transformer, although some alsoproduceacorrespondingtripinothercompo-
plantsleavesomeoftheirauxiliarybusespowered nents;forexample,aturbinetriptypicallyresults
fromastartuptransformer(thatis,fromtheoffsite in a reactor trip above a low power setpoint.
power distribution system). When plant power
Generator protective features typically include
generation is interrupted, the power supply auto-
over-current, ground detection, differential relays
maticallytransferstotheoffsitepowersource(the
(which monitor for electrical fault conditions
startup transformer). If that is not supplying
withinazoneofprotectiondefinedbythelocation
acceptable voltage, the circuit breakers to the
ofthesensors,typicallythemaingeneratorandall
safety-related buses open, and the buses are
transformers connected directly to the generator
reenergized by the respective fast-starting emer-
output), electrical faults on the transformers con-
gency diesel generators. The nonsafety auxiliary
nectedtothegenerator,lossofthegeneratorfield,
buses will remain deenergized until offsite power
andaturbinetrip.Turbineprotectivefeaturestyp-
is restored.
icallyincludeover-speed(usuallysetat1980rpm
Operational Features of U.S. Nuclear Power or 66 Hz), low bearing oil pressure, high bearing
Plants vibration, degraded condenser vacuum, thrust
Response of nuclear power plants to changes in bearing failure, or generator trip. Reactor protec-
switchyardvoltage.Withthemaingeneratorvolt- tive features typically include trips for over-
ageregulatorintheautomaticmode,thegenerator power, abnormal pressure in the reactor coolant
will respond to an increase of switchyard voltage system,lowreactorcoolantsystemflow,lowlevel
byreducingthegeneratorfieldexcitationcurrent. in the steam generators or the reactor vessel, or a
This will result in a decrease of reactive power, trip of the turbine.
normally measured as mega-volts-amperes-reac-
Considerations on Returning a U.S.
tive (MVAr) from the generator to the switchyard
andouttothesurroundinggrid,helpingtocontrol Nuclear Power Plant to Power
thegridvoltageincrease.Withthemaingenerator Production After Switchyard Voltage
voltage regulator in the automatic mode, the gen- Is Restored
erator will respond to a decrease of switchyard
voltagebyincreasingthegeneratorfieldexcitation The following are examples of the types of activi-
current. This will result in an increase of reactive ties that must be completed before returning a
114  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

nuclear power plant to power production follow- decreased significantly (more than 24 hours
ing a loss of switchyard voltage. after the trip).
  Switchyard voltage must be normal and stable It may require a day or more before a nuclear
fromanoffsitesupply.Nuclearpowerplantsare power plant can restart following a normal trip.
notdesignedforblack-startcapability(theabil- Plant trips are a significant transient on plant
ity to start up without external power). equipment,andsomemaintenancemaybeneces-
sary before the plant can restart. When combined
  Plant buses must be energized from the
with the infrequent event of loss of offsite power,
switchyard and the emergency diesel genera-
additional recovery actions will be required.
tors restored to standby mode.
Safety systems, such as emergency diesel genera-
  Normal plant equipment, such as reactor cool- tors and safety-related decay heat removal sys-
ant pumps and circulating water pumps, must tems, must be restored to normal lineups. These
be restarted. additional actions would extend the time neces-
sary to restart a nuclear plant from this type of
  A reactor trip review report must be completed
event.
and approved by plant management, and the
cause of the trip must be addressed.
Summary of U.S. Nuclear Power Plant
  Allplanttechnicalspecificationsmustbesatis- Response to and Safety During the
fied.Technicalspecificationsareissuedtoeach August 14 Outage
nuclear power plant as part of their license by
the NRC. They dictate equipment which must TheNWG’sreviewdidnotidentifyanyactivityor
beoperableandprocessparameterswhichmust equipment issues at U.S. nuclear power plants
be met to allow operation of the reactor. Exam- thatcausedthetransientonAugust14,2003.Nine
plesofactionsthatwererequiredfollowingthe nuclearpowerplantstrippedwithinabout60sec-
events of August 14 include refilling the diesel onds as a result of the grid disturbance. Addi-
fuel oil storage tanks, refilling the condensate tionally, many nuclear power plants experienced
storage tanks, establishing reactor coolant sys- a transient due to this grid disturbance.
tem forced flow, and cooling the suppression
Nuclear Power Plants That Tripped
pool to normal operating limits. Surveillance
tests must be completed as required by techni- The trips at nine nuclear power plants resulted
cal specifications (for example, operability of fromtheplantresponsestothegriddisturbances.
the low-range neutron detectors must be Followingtheinitialgriddisturbances,voltagesin
demonstrated). the plant switchyard fluctuated and reactive
  Systemsmustbealignedtosupportthestartup. power flows fluctuated. As the voltage regulators
on the main generators attempted to compensate,
  Pressures and temperatures for reactor startup equipment limits were exceeded and protective
must be established in the reactor coolant sys- tripsresulted.ThishappenedatFermi2andOys-
tem for pressurized water reactors. terCreek.Fermi2trippedonageneratorfieldpro-
tection trip. Oyster Creek tripped due to a
  A reactor criticality calculation must be per-
generator trip on high ratio of voltage relative to
formed to predict the control rod withdrawals
the electrical frequency.
needed to achieve criticality, where the fission
chain reaction becomes self-sustaining due to Also,asthebalancebetweenelectricalgeneration
the increased neutron flux. Certain neutron- and electrical load on the grid was disturbed, the
absorbing fission products increase in concen- electrical frequency began to fluctuate. In some
tration following a reactor trip (followed later cases the electrical frequency dropped low
by a decrease or decay). At pressurized water enough to actuate protective features. This hap-
reactors,theboronconcentrationintheprimary penedatIndianPoint2,IndianPoint3,andPerry.
coolantmustbeadjustedtomatchthecriticality Perry tripped due to a generator under-frequency
calculation. Near the end of the fuel cycle, the tripsignal.IndianPoint2andIndianPoint3trip-
nuclear power plant may not have enough pedwhenthegridfrequencydroppedlowenough
boronadjustmentorcontrolrodworthavailable to trip reactor coolant pumps, which actuated a
for restart until the neutron absorbers have reactor protective feature.
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  115

In other cases, the electrical frequency fluctuated at least one safety bus at about 01:53 EDT on
andwenthigherthannormal.Turbinecontrolsys- August 15. The following equipment problems
tems responded in an attempt to control the fre- were noted: the Combustion Turbine Generator
quency. Equipment limits were exceeded as a (thealternateACpowersource)failedtostartfrom
result of the reaction of the turbine control sys- the control room; however, it was successfully
tems to large frequency changes. This led to trips started locally. In addition, the Spent Fuel Pool
at FitzPatrick, Nine Mile 1, Nine Mile 2, and Cooling System was interrupted for approxi-
Ginna.FitzPatrickandNineMile2trippedonlow mately26hoursandreachedamaximumtemper-
pressure in the turbine hydraulic control oil sys- ature of 130 degrees Fahrenheit (55 degrees
tem.NineMile1trippedonturbinelightloadpro- Celsius). The main generator was reconnected to
tection. Ginna tripped due to conditions in the the grid at about 01:41 EDT on August 20.
reactorfollowingrapidclosureoftheturbinecon-
FitzPatrick. FitzPatrick is located about 8 miles
trol valves in response to high frequency on the
(13km)northeastofOswego,NY,innorthernNew
grid.
YorkonLakeOntario.Itwasgeneratingabout850
ThePerry,Fermi2,OysterCreek,andNineMile1 MWe before the event. The reactor tripped due to
reactors tripped immediately after the generator lowpressureinthehydraulicsystemthatcontrols
tripped, although that is not apparent from the the turbine control valves. Low pressure in this
timesbelow,becausetheclockswerenotsynchro- system typically indicates a large load reject, for
nized to the national time standard. The Indian which a reactor trip is expected. In this case the
Point2and3,FitzPatrick,Ginna,andNineMile2 pressure in the system was low because the con-
reactors tripped before the generators. When the trol system was rapidly manipulating the turbine
reactor trips first, there is generally a short time controlvalvestocontrolturbinespeed,whichwas
delay before the generator output breakers open. being affected by grid frequency fluctuations.
Theelectricalgenerationdecreasesrapidlytozero
Immediately preceding the trip, both significant
afterthereactortrip.Table8.1providesthetimes
over-voltage and under-voltage grid conditions
from the data collected for the reactor trip times,
were experienced. Offsite power was subse-
andthetimethegeneratoroutputbreakersopened
quently lost to the plant auxiliary buses. The
(generator trip), as reported by the ESWG. Addi-
safety buses were deenergized and automatically
tional details on the plants that tripped are given
reenergizedfromtheemergencydieselgenerators.
below,andsummarizedinTable8.2onpage120.
The lowest emergency declaration, an Unusual
Fermi2.Fermi2islocated25miles(40km)north-
Event,wasdeclaredatabout16:26EDTduetothe
east of Toledo, Ohio, in southern Michigan on
loss of offsite power. Decay heat removal systems
Lake Erie. It was generating about 1,130 mega-
maintained the cooling function for the reactor
watts-electric(MWe)beforetheevent.Thereactor
fuel. Offsite power was restored to at least one
trippedduetoaturbinetrip.Theturbinetripwas
safety bus at about 23:07 EDT on August 14. The
likelytheresultofmultiplegeneratorfieldprotec-
main generator was reconnected to the grid at
tion trips (overexcitation and loss of field) as the
about 06:10 EDT on August 18.
Fermi2generatorrespondedtoaseriesofrapidly
changingtransientspriortoitsloss.Thisisconsis-
Table 8.1. U.S. Nuclear Plant Trip Times
tentwithdatathatshowslargeswingsoftheFermi
2 generator MVAr prior to its trip. Nuclear Plant Reactor Tripa Generator Tripb
Perry . . . . . . . . . 16:10:25 EDT 16:10:42 EDT
Offsite power was subsequently lost to the plant
Fermi 2 . . . . . . . 16:10:53 EDT 16:10:53 EDT
auxiliary buses. The safety buses were de-
Oyster Creek. . . 16:10:58 EDT 16:10:57 EDT
energizedandautomaticallyreenergizedfromthe
Nine Mile 1 . . . . 16:11 EDT 16:11:04 EDT
emergency diesel generators. The operators trip-
Indian Point 2 . . 16:11 EDT 16:11:09 EDT
ped one emergency diesel generator that was par-
Indian Point 3 . . 16:11 EDT 16:11:23 EDT
alleled to the grid for testing, after which it
automaticallyloaded.Decayheatremovalsystems FitzPatrick. . . . . 16:11:04 EDT 16:11:32 EDT
maintained the cooling function for the reactor Ginna. . . . . . . . . 16:11:36 EDT 16:12:17 EDT
fuel. Nine Mile 2 . . . . 16:11:48 EDT 16:11:52 EDT
aAsdeterminedfromlicenseedata(whichmaynotbesyn-
The lowest emergency declaration, an Unusual
chronized to the national time standard).
Event,wasdeclaredatabout16:22EDTduetothe bAsreportedbytheElectricalSystemWorkingGroup(syn-
