Enforcement Program shall issue the board-approved compliance templates to the regional
reliability councils for adoption into their compliance monitoring programs.
This effort will make maximum use of existing approved and draft compliance templates in order to
meet the aggressive schedule. The templates are intended to include all existing NERC operating
policies and planning standards but can be adapted going forward to incorporate new reliability
standards as they are adopted by the NERC board for implementation in the future.
When the investigation team’s final report on the August 14 violations of NERC and regional
standards is available in March, it will be important to assess and understand the lapses that allowed
violations to go unreported until a large-scale blackout occurred.
Recommendation 2d: The NERC Compliance Enforcement Program and ECAR shall, within
three months of the issuance of the final report from the Compliance and Standards
investigation team, evaluate the identified violations of NERC and regional standards, as
compared to previous compliance reviews and audits for the applicable entities, and develop
recommendations to improve the compliance process.
Recommendation 3. Initiate Control Area and Reliability Coordinator Reliability Readiness
Audits.
In conducting its investigation, NERC found that deficiencies in control area and reliability
coordinator capabilities to perform assigned reliability functions contributed to the August 14
blackout. In addition to specific violations of NERC and regional standards, some reliability
coordinators and control areas were deficient in the performance of their reliability functions and did
not achieve a level of performance that would be considered acceptable practice in areas such as
operating tools, communications, and training. In a number of cases there was a lack of clarity in the
NERC policies with regard to what is expected of a reliability coordinator or control area. Although
the deficiencies in the NERC policies must be addressed (see Recommendation 9), it is equally
important to recognize that standards cannot prescribe all aspects of reliable operation and that
minimum standards present a threshold, not a target for performance. Reliability coordinators and
control areas must perform well, particularly under emergency conditions, and at all times strive for
excellence in their assigned reliability functions and responsibilities.
Approved by the Board of Trustees 6
February 10, 2004
198  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

Recommendation 3a: The NERC Compliance Enforcement Program and the regional
reliability councils shall jointly establish a program to audit the reliability readiness of all
reliability coordinators and control areas, with immediate attention given to addressing the
deficiencies identified in the August 14 blackout investigation. Audits of all control areas and
reliability coordinators shall be completed within three years and continue in a three-year
cycle. The 20 highest priority audits, as determined by the Compliance Enforcement Program,
will be completed by June 30, 2004.
Recommendation 3b: NERC will establish a set of baseline audit criteria to which regional
criteria may be added. The control area requirements will be based on the existing NERC
Control Area Certification Procedure. Reliability coordinator audits will include evaluation of
reliability plans, procedures, processes, tools, personnel qualifications, and training. In
addition to reviewing written documents, the audits will carefully examine the actual practices
and preparedness of control areas and reliability coordinators.
Recommendation 3c: The reliability regions, with the oversight and direct participation of
NERC, will audit each control area’s and reliability coordinator’s readiness to meet these audit
criteria. FERC and other relevant regulatory agencies will be invited to participate in the
audits, subject to the same confidentiality conditions as the other members of the audit teams.
Recommendation 4. Evaluate Vegetation Management Procedures and Results.
Ineffective vegetation management was a major cause of the August 14 blackout and also contributed
to other historical large-scale blackouts, such on July 2-3, 1996 in the west. Maintaining
transmission line rights-of-way (ROW), including maintaining safe clearances of energized lines
from vegetation, under-build, and other obstructions2 incurs a substantial ongoing cost in many areas
of North America. However, it is an important investment for assuring a reliable electric system.
NERC does not presently have standards for ROW maintenance. Standards on vegetation
management are particularly challenging given the great diversity of vegetation and growth patterns
across North America. However, NERC’s standards do require that line ratings are calculated so as
to maintain safe clearances from all obstructions. Furthermore, in the United States, the National
Electrical Safety Code (NESC) Rules 232, 233, and 234 detail the minimum vertical and horizontal
safety clearances of overhead conductors from grounded objects and various types of obstructions.
NESC Rule 218 addresses tree clearances by simply stating, “Trees that may interfere with
ungrounded supply conductors should be trimmed or removed.” Several states have adopted their
own electrical safety codes and similar codes apply in Canada.
Recognizing that ROW maintenance requirements vary substantially depending on local conditions,
NERC will focus attention initially on measuring performance as indicated by the number of high
voltage line trips caused by vegetation rather than immediately move toward developing standards for
2 Vegetation, such as the trees that caused the initial line trips in FE that led to the August 14, 2003 outage is not the only
type of obstruction that can breach the safe clearance distances from energized lines. Other examples include under-build
of telephone and cable TV lines, train crossings, and even nests of certain large bird species.
Approved by the Board of Trustees 7
February 10, 2004
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  199

ROW maintenance. This approach has worked well in the Western Electricity Coordinating Council
(WECC) since being instituted after the 1996 outages.
Recommendation 4a: NERC and the regional reliability councils shall jointly initiate a program
to report all bulk electric system3 transmission line trips resulting from vegetation contact4.
The program will use the successful WECC vegetation monitoring program as a model.
Recommendation 4b: Beginning with an effective date of January 1, 2004, each transmission
operator will submit an annual report of all vegetation-related high voltage line trips to its
respective reliability region. Each region shall assemble a detailed annual report of vegetation-
related line trips in the region to NERC no later than March 31 for the preceding year, with the
first reporting to be completed by March 2005 for calendar year 2004.
Vegetation management practices, including inspection and trimming requirements, can vary
significantly with geography. Additionally, some entities use advanced techniques such as planting
beneficial species or applying growth retardants. Nonetheless, the events of August 14 and prior
outages point to the need for independent verification that viable programs exist for ROW
maintenance and that the programs are being followed.
Recommendation 4c: Each bulk electric transmission owner shall make its vegetation
management procedure, and documentation of work completed, available for review and
verification upon request by the applicable regional reliability council, NERC, or applicable
federal, state or provincial regulatory agency.
Should this approach of monitoring vegetation-related line outages and procedures prove ineffective
in reducing the number of vegetation-related line outages, NERC will consider the development of
minimum line clearance standards to assure reliability.
Recommendation 5. Establish a Program to Track Implementation of Recommendations.
The August 14 blackout shared a number of contributing factors with prior large-scale blackouts,
including:
• Conductors contacting trees
• Ineffective visualization of power system conditions and lack of situational awareness
• Ineffective communications
• Lack of training in recognizing and responding to emergencies
• Insufficient static and dynamic reactive power supply
• Need to improve relay protection schemes and coordination
3 All transmission lines operating at 230 kV and higher voltage, and any other lower voltage lines designated by the
regional reliability council to be critical to the reliability of the bulk electric system, shall be included in the program.
4 A line trip includes a momentary opening and reclosing of the line, a lock out, or a combination. For reporting
purposes, all vegetation-related openings of a line occurring within one 24-hour period should be considered one event.
Trips known to be caused by severe weather or other natural disaster such as earthquake are excluded. Contact with
vegetation includes both physical contact and arcing due to insufficient clearance.
Approved by the Board of Trustees 8
February 10, 2004
200  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

It is important that recommendations resulting from system outages be adopted consistently by all
regions and operating entities, not just those directly affected by a particular outage. Several lessons
learned prior to August 14, if heeded, could have prevented the outage. WECC and NPCC, for
example, have programs that could be used as models for tracking completion of recommendations.
NERC and some regions have not adequately tracked completion of recommendations from prior
events to ensure they were consistently implemented.
Recommendation 5a: NERC and each regional reliability council shall establish a program for
documenting completion of recommendations resulting from the August 14 blackout and other
historical outages, as well as NERC and regional reports on violations of reliability standards, results
of compliance audits, and lessons learned from system disturbances. Regions shall report quarterly to
NERC on the status of follow-up actions to address recommendations, lessons learned, and areas
noted for improvement. NERC staff shall report both NERC activities and a summary of regional
activities to the board.
Assuring compliance with reliability standards, evaluating the reliability readiness of reliability
coordinators and control areas, and assuring recommended actions are achieved will be effective
steps in reducing the chances of future large-scale outages. However, it is important for NERC to
also adopt a process for continuous learning and improvement by seeking continuous feedback on
reliability performance trends, not rely mainly on learning from and reacting to catastrophic failures.
Recommendation 5b: NERC shall by January 1, 2005 establish a reliability performance
monitoring function to evaluate and report bulk electric system reliability performance.
Such a function would assess large-scale outages and near misses to determine root causes and
lessons learned, similar to the August 14 blackout investigation. This function would incorporate the
current Disturbance Analysis Working Group and expand that work to provide more proactive
feedback to the NERC board regarding reliability performance. This program would also gather and
analyze reliability performance statistics to inform the board of reliability trends. This function could
develop procedures and capabilities to initiate investigations in the event of future large-scale outages
or disturbances. Such procedures and capabilities would be shared between NERC and the regional
reliability councils for use as needed, with NERC and regional investigation roles clearly defined in
advance.
Approved by the Board of Trustees 9
February 10, 2004
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  201

Technical Initiatives to Minimize the Likelihood
and Impacts of Possible Future Cascading Outages
Recommendation 6. Improve Operator and Reliability Coordinator Training.
NERC found during its investigation that some reliability coordinators and control area operators had
not received adequate training in recognizing and responding to system emergencies. Most notable
was the lack of realistic simulations and drills for training and verifying the capabilities of operating
personnel. This training deficiency contributed to the lack of situational awareness and failure to
declare an emergency when operator intervention was still possible prior to the high speed portion of
the sequence of events.
Recommendation 6: All reliability coordinators, control areas, and transmission operators shall
provide at least five days per year of training and drills in system emergencies, using realistic
simulations5, for each staff person with responsibility for the real-time operation or reliability
monitoring of the bulk electric system. This system emergency training is in addition to other
training requirements. Five days of system emergency training and drills are to be completed
prior to June 30, 2004, with credit given for documented training already completed since July
1, 2003. Training documents, including curriculum, training methods, and individual training
records, are to be available for verification during reliability readiness audits.
NERC has published Continuing Education Criteria specifying appropriate qualifications for
continuing education providers and training activities.
In the longer term, the NERC Personnel Certification Governance Committee (PCGC), which is
independent of the NERC board, should explore expanding the certification requirements of system
operating personnel to include additional measures of competency in recognizing and responding to
system emergencies. The current NERC certification examination is a written test of the NERC
Operating Manual and other references relating to operator job duties, and is not by itself intended to
be a complete demonstration of competency to handle system emergencies.
Recommendation 7. Evaluate Reactive Power and Voltage Control Practices.
The August 14 blackout investigation identified inconsistent practices in northeastern Ohio with
regard to the setting and coordination of voltage limits and insufficient reactive power supply.
Although the deficiency of reactive power supply in northeastern Ohio did not directly cause the
blackout, it was a contributing factor and was a significant violation of existing reliability standards.
In particular, there appear to have been violations of NERC Planning Standard I.D.S1 requiring static
and dynamic reactive power resources to meet the performance criteria specified in Table I of
5 The term “realistic simulations” includes a variety of tools and methods that present operating personnel with situations
to improve and test diagnostic and decision-making skills in an environment that resembles expected conditions during a
particular type of system emergency. Although a full replica training simulator is one approach, lower cost alternatives
such as PC-based simulators, tabletop drills, and simulated communications can be effective training aids if used
properly.
Approved by the Board of Trustees 10
February 10, 2004
202  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

Planning Standard I.A on Transmission Systems. Planning Standard II.B.S1 requires each regional
reliability council to establish procedures for generating equipment data verification and testing,
including reactive power capability. Planning Standard III.C.S1 requires that all synchronous
generators connected to the interconnected transmission systems shall be operated with their
excitation system in the automatic voltage control mode unless approved otherwise by the
transmission system operator. S2 of this standard also requires that generators shall maintain a
network voltage or reactive power output as required by the transmission system operator within the
reactive capability of the units.
On one hand, the unsafe conditions on August 14 with respect to voltage in northeastern Ohio can be
said to have resulted from violations of NERC planning criteria for reactive power and voltage
control, and those violations should have been identified through the NERC and ECAR compliance
monitoring programs (addressed by Recommendation 2). On the other hand, investigators believe
these deficiencies are also symptomatic of a systematic breakdown of the reliability studies and
practices in FE and the ECAR region that allowed unsafe voltage criteria to be set and used in study
models and operations. There were also issues identified with reactive characteristics of loads, as
addressed in Recommendation 14.
Recommendation 7a: The Planning Committee shall reevaluate within one year the
effectiveness of the existing reactive power and voltage control standards and how they are
being implemented in practice in the ten NERC regions. Based on this evaluation, the Planning
Committee shall recommend revisions to standards or process improvements to ensure voltage
control and stability issues are adequately addressed.
Recommendation 7b: ECAR shall no later than June 30, 2004 review its reactive power and
voltage criteria and procedures, verify that its criteria and procedures are being fully
implemented in regional and member studies and operations, and report the results to the
NERC board.
Recommendation 8. Improve System Protection to Slow or Limit the Spread of Future
Cascading Outages.
The importance of automatic control and protection systems in preventing, slowing, or mitigating the
impact of a large-scale outage cannot be stressed enough. To underscore this point, following the trip
of the Sammis-Star line at 4:06, the cascading failure into parts of eight states and two provinces,
including the trip of over 531 generating units and over 400 transmission lines, was completed in the
next eight minutes. Most of the event sequence, in fact, occurred in the final 12 seconds of the
cascade. Likewise, the July 2, 1996 failure took less than 30 seconds and the August 10, 1996 failure
took only 5 minutes. It is not practical to expect operators will always be able to analyze a massive,
complex system failure and to take the appropriate corrective actions in a matter of a few minutes.
The NERC investigators believe that two measures would have been crucial in slowing or stopping
the uncontrolled cascade on August 14:
• Better application of zone 3 impedance relays on high voltage transmission lines
• Selective use of under-voltage load shedding.
Approved by the Board of Trustees 11
February 10, 2004
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  203

First, beginning with the Sammis-Star line trip, most of the remaining line trips during the cascade
phase were the result of the operation of a zone 3 relay for a perceived overload (a combination of
high amperes and low voltage) on the protected line. If used, zone 3 relays typically act as an
overreaching backup to the zone 1 and 2 relays, and are not intentionally set to operate on a line
overload. However, under extreme conditions of low voltages and large power swings as seen on
August 14, zone 3 relays can operate for overload conditions and propagate the outage to a wider area
by essentially causing the system to “break up”. Many of the zone 3 relays that operated during the
August 14 cascading outage were not set with adequate margins above their emergency thermal
ratings. For the short times involved, thermal heating is not a problem and the lines should not be
tripped for overloads. Instead, power system protection devices should be set to address the specific
condition of concern, such as a fault, out-of-step condition, etc., and should not compromise a power
system’s inherent physical capability to slow down or stop a cascading event.
Recommendation 8a: All transmission owners shall, no later than September 30, 2004, evaluate
the zone 3 relay settings on all transmission lines operating at 230 kV and above for the
purpose of verifying that each zone 3 relay is not set to trip on load under extreme emergency
conditions6. In each case that a zone 3 relay is set so as to trip on load under extreme
conditions, the transmission operator shall reset, upgrade, replace, or otherwise mitigate the
overreach of those relays as soon as possible and on a priority basis, but no later than
December 31, 2005. Upon completing analysis of its application of zone 3 relays, each
transmission owner may no later than December 31, 2004 submit justification to NERC for
applying zone 3 relays outside of these recommended parameters. The Planning Committee
shall review such exceptions to ensure they do not increase the risk of widening a cascading
failure of the power system.
A second key finding with regard to system protection was that if an automatic under-voltage load
shedding scheme had been in place in the Cleveland-Akron area on August 14, there is a high
probability the outage could have been limited to that area.
Recommendation 8b: Each regional reliability council shall complete an evaluation of the
feasibility and benefits of installing under-voltage load shedding capability in load centers
within the region that could become unstable as a result of being deficient in reactive power
following credible multiple-contingency events. The regions are to complete the initial studies
and report the results to NERC within one year. The regions are requested to promote the
installation of under-voltage load shedding capabilities within critical areas, as determined by
the studies to be effective in preventing an uncontrolled cascade of the power system.
The NERC investigation of the August 14 blackout has identified additional transmission and
generation control and protection issues requiring further analysis. One concern is that generating
unit control and protection schemes need to consider the full range of possible extreme system
conditions, such as the low voltages and low and high frequencies experienced on August 14. The
team also noted that improvements may be needed in under-frequency load shedding and its
coordination with generator under-and over-frequency protection and controls.
6 The NERC investigation team recommends that the zone 3 relay, if used, should not operate at or below 150% of the
emergency ampere rating of a line, assuming a .85 per unit voltage and a line phase angle of 30 degrees.
Approved by the Board of Trustees 12
February 10, 2004
204  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

Recommendation 8c: The Planning Committee shall evaluate Planning Standard III – System
Protection and Control and propose within one year specific revisions to the criteria to
adequately address the issue of slowing or limiting the propagation of a cascading failure. The
board directs the Planning Committee to evaluate the lessons from August 14 regarding relay
protection design and application and offer additional recommendations for improvement.
Recommendation 9. Clarify Reliability Coordinator and Control Area Functions,
Responsibilities, Capabilities and Authorities.
Ambiguities in the NERC operating policies may have allowed entities involved in the August 14
blackout to make different interpretations regarding the functions, responsibilities, capabilities, and
authorities of reliability coordinators and control areas. Characteristics and capabilities necessary to
enable prompt recognition and effective response to system emergencies must be specified.
The lack of timely and accurate outage information resulted in degraded performance of state
