system instability or collapse and, at distribu-
demand. Demand is somewhat predictable,
tion voltages, can cause damage to motors and
appearing as a daily demand curve—in the
the failure of electronic equipment. High volt-
summer, highest during the afternoon and eve-
ages can exceed the insulation capabilities of
ning and lowest in the middle of the night, and
equipment and cause dangerous electric arcs
higher on weekdays when most businesses are
(“flashovers”).
open (Figure 2.3).
3.Monitor flows over transmission lines and
Failure to match generation to demand causes
otherfacilitiestoensurethatthermal(heating)
the frequency of an AC power system (nomi-
limits are not exceeded. The dynamic interac-
nally 60 cycles per second or 60 Hertz) to
tions between generators and loads, combined
increase (when generation exceeds demand) or
with the fact that electricity flows freely across
decrease(whengenerationislessthandemand)
all interconnected circuits, mean that power
(Figure 2.4). Random, small variations in fre-
flow is ever-changing on transmission and dis-
quency are normal, as loads come on and off
tribution lines. All lines, transformers, and
andgeneratorsmodifytheiroutputtofollowthe
other equipment carrying electricity are heated
demand changes. However, large deviations in
by the flow of electricity through them. The
frequencycancausetherotationalspeedofgen-
erators to fluctuate, leading to vibrations that
can damage generator turbine blades and other
Figure 2.4. Normal and Abnormal Frequency
equipment.Extremelowfrequenciescantrigger
Ranges
Figure 2.3. PJM Load Curve, August 18-24, 2003
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  7

Local Supplies of Reactive Power Are Essential to Maintaining Voltage Stability
A generator typically produces some mixture of linesbothconsumeandproducereactivepower.
“real” and “reactive” power, and the balance At light loads they are net producers, and at
between them can be adjusted at short notice to heavyloads,theyareheavyconsumers.Reactive
meetchangingconditions.Realpower,measured powerconsumptionbythesefacilitiesordevices
in watts, is the form of electricity that powers tends to depress transmission voltage, while its
equipment. Reactive power, a characteristic of production (by generators) or injection (from
AC systems, is measured in volt-amperes reac- storage devices such as capacitors) tends to sup-
tive(VAr),andistheenergysuppliedtocreateor port voltage. Reactive power can be transmitted
be stored in electric or magnetic fields in and onlyoverrelativelyshortdistancesduringheavy
around electrical equipment. Reactive power is loadconditions.Ifreactivepowercannotbesup-
particularly important for equipment that relies plied promptly and in sufficient quantity, volt-
onmagneticfieldsfortheproductionofinduced ages decay, and in extreme cases a “voltage
electric currents (e.g., motors, transformers, collapse” may result.
pumps, and air conditioning.) Transmission
flow must be limited to avoid overheating and limits, like thermal limits, are expressed as a
damaging the equipment. In the case of over- maximum amount of electricity that can be
headpowerlines,heatingalsocausesthemetal safely transferred over transmission lines.
conductortostretchorexpandandsagcloserto
There are two types of stability limits: (1) Volt-
groundlevel.Conductorheatingisalsoaffected
age stability limits are set to ensure that the
by ambient temperature, wind, and other fac-
unplanned loss of a line or generator (which
tors.Flowonoverheadlinesmustbelimitedto
may have been providing locally critical reac-
ensure that the line does not sag into obstruc-
tive power support, as described previously)
tions below such as trees or telephone lines, or
will not cause voltages to fall to dangerously
violatetheminimumsafetyclearancesbetween
low levels. If voltage falls too low, it begins to
the energized lines and other objects. (A short
collapse uncontrollably, at which point auto-
circuit or “flashover”—which can start fires or
matic relays either shed load or trip generators
damage equipment—can occur if an energized
toavoiddamage.(2)Power(angle)stabilitylim-
linegetstooclosetoanotherobject).Mosttrans-
its are set to ensure that a short circuit or an
mission lines, transformers and other current-
unplannedlossofaline,transformer,orgenera-
carryingdevicesaremonitoredcontinuouslyto
torwillnotcausetheremaininggeneratorsand
ensure that they do not become overloaded or
loads being served to lose synchronism with
violate other operating constraints. Multiple
one another. (Recall that all generators and
ratingsaretypicallyused,onefornormalcondi-
loadswithinaninterconnectionmustoperateat
tions and a higher rating for emergencies. The
or very near a common 60 Hz frequency.) Loss
primarymeansoflimitingtheflowofpoweron
of synchronism with the common frequency
transmission lines is to adjust selectively the
meansgeneratorsareoperatingout-of-stepwith
output of generators.
one another. Even modest losses of synchro-
nism can result in damage to generation equip-
4.Keepthesysteminastablecondition.Because
ment. Under extreme losses of synchronism,
the electric system is interconnected and
thegridmaybreakapartintoseparateelectrical
dynamic, electrical stability limits must be
islands;eachislandwouldbegintomaintainits
observed. Stability problems can develop very
ownfrequency,determinedbytheload/genera-
quickly—injustafewcycles(acycleis1/60thof
tion balance within the island.
a second)—or more slowly, over seconds or
minutes. The main concern is to ensure that 5.Operatethesystemsothatitremainsinareli-
generation dispatch and the resulting power able condition even if a contingency occurs,
flows and voltages are such that the system is suchasthelossofakeygeneratorortransmis-
stableatalltimes.(Aswillbedescribedlaterin sion facility (the “N minus 1 criterion”). The
this report, part of the Eastern Interconnection central organizing principle of electricity reli-
became unstable on August 14, resulting in a ability management is to plan for the unex-
cascading outage over a wide area.) Stability pected.Theuniquecharacteristicsofelectricity
8  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

mean that problems, when they arise, can does not jeopardize the remaining facilities in
spread and escalate very quickly if proper safe- the system by causing them to exceed their
guards are not in place. Accordingly, through emergency ratings or stability limits, which
yearsofexperience,theindustryhasdeveloped could lead to a cascading outage.
a network of defensive strategies for maintain-
Further, when a contingency does occur, the
ing reliability based on the assumption that
operators are required to identify and assess
equipmentcanandwillfailunexpectedlyupon
immediately the new worst contingencies,
occasion.
given the changed conditions, and promptly
This principle is expressed by the requirement make any adjustments needed to ensure that if
thatthesystemmustbeoperatedatalltimesto one of them were to occur, the system would
ensure that it will remain in a secure condition still remain operational and safe. NERC operat-
(generallywithinemergencyratingsforcurrent ing policy requires that the system be restored
and voltage and within established stability assoonaspracticalbutwithinnomorethan30
limits) following the loss of the most important minutes to compliance with normal limits, and
generator or transmission facility (a “worst sin- to a condition where it can once again with-
gle contingency”). This is called the “N-1 crite- stand the next-worst single contingency with-
rion.” In other words, because a generator or out violating thermal, voltage, or stability
linetripcanoccuratanytimefromrandomfail- limits. A few areas of the grid are operated to
ure, the power system must be operated in a withstand the concurrent loss of two or more
preventive mode so that the loss of the most facilities (i.e., “N-2”). This may be done, for
important generator or transmission facility example, as an added safety measure to protect
Why Don’t More Blackouts Happen?
Given the complexity of the bulk power system inthefaceoftheworstsinglecontingencythat
and the day-to-day challenges of operating it, could occur relative to current conditions,
there are a lot of things that could go wrong— which means that the system is also prepared
whichmakesitreasonabletowonderwhysofew for less adverse contingencies.
large outages occur.
3.Quick response capability. Most potential
Large outages or blackouts are infrequent problems first emerge as a small, local situa-
because responsible system owners and opera- tion. When a small, local problem is handled
tors practice “defense in depth,” meaning that quicklyandresponsiblyusingNERCoperating
they protect the bulk power system through lay- practices—particularlytoreturnthesystemto
ers of safety-related practices and equipment. N-1 readiness within 30 minutes or less—
These include: the problem can usually be resolved and
contained before it grows beyond local
1.A range of rigorous planning and operating
proportions.
studies, including long-term assessments,
year-ahead, season-ahead, week-ahead, day- 4.Maintain a surplus of generation and trans-
ahead,hour-ahead,andreal-timeoperational mission. This provides a cushion in day-to-
contingency analyses. Planners and operators day operations, and helps ensure that small
use these to evaluate the condition of the sys- problems don’t become big problems.
tem, anticipate problems ranging from likely
5.Havebackupcapabilitiesforallcriticalfunc-
to low probability but high consequence, and
tions. Most owners and operators maintain
developagoodunderstandingofthelimitsand
backup capabilities—such as redundant
rules for safe, secure operation under such
equipmentalreadyon-line(fromgenerationin
contingencies.Ifmultiplecontingenciesoccur
spinning reserve and transmission operating
in a single area, they are likely to be interde-
margin and limits to computers and other
pendentratherthanrandom,andshouldhave
operational control systems)—and keep an
been anticipated in planning studies.
inventoryofsparepartstobeabletohandlean
2.Preparationfortheworstcase.Theoperating equipment failure.
rule is to always prepare the system to be safe
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  9

adenselypopulatedmetropolitanareaorwhen system as quickly as possible to a normal and
lines share a common structure and could be reliable condition.
affected by a common failure mode, e.g., a sin-
gle lightning strike. Reliability Organizations Oversee
6.Plan,design,andmaintainthesystemtooper- Grid Reliability in North America
ate reliably. Reliable power system operation
requires far more than monitoring and control- NERC is a non-governmental entity whose mis-
ling the system in real-time. Thorough plan- sion is to ensure that the bulk electric system in
ning, design, maintenance, and analysis are North America is reliable, adequate and secure.
required to ensure that the system can be oper- The organization was established in 1968, as a
ated reliably and within safe limits. Short-term result of the Northeast blackout in 1965. Since its
planning addresses day-ahead and week-ahead inception,NERChasoperatedasavoluntaryorga-
operations planning; long-term planning nization,relyingonreciprocity,peerpressureand
focuses on providing adequate generation the mutual self-interest of all those involved to
resources and transmission capacity to ensure ensure compliance with reliability requirements.
that in the future the system will be able to An independent board governs NERC.
withstandseverecontingencieswithoutexperi-
To fulfill its mission, NERC:
encing widespread, uncontrolled cascading
outages.   Sets standards for the reliable operation and
planning of the bulk electric system.
A utility that serves retail customers must esti-
mate future loads and, in some cases, arrange   Monitors and assesses compliance with stan-
for adequate sources of supplies and plan ade- dards for bulk electric system reliability.
quate transmission and distribution infrastruc-
  Provides education and training resources to
ture.NERCplanningstandardsidentifyarange
promote bulk electric system reliability.
ofpossiblecontingenciesandsetcorresponding
expectationsforsystemperformanceundersev-   Assesses, analyzes and reports on bulk electric
eral categories of possible events, ranging from
system adequacy and performance.
everyday“probable”eventsto“extreme”events
that may involve substantial loss of customer   Coordinates with regional reliability councils
loadandgenerationinawidespreadarea.NERC and other organizations.
planning standards also address requirements
  Coordinates the provision of applications
for voltage support and reactive power, distur-
(tools), data and services necessary to support
bance monitoring, facility ratings, system mod-
the reliable operation and planning of the bulk
eling and data requirements, system protection
electric system.
and control, and system restoration.
  Certifies reliability service organizations and
7. Prepare for emergencies. System operators are
personnel.
required to take the steps described above to
plan and operate a reliable power system, but   Coordinatescriticalinfrastructureprotectionof
emergencies can still occur because of external the bulk electric system.
factors such as severe weather, operator error,
  Enables the reliable operation of the intercon-
or equipment failures that exceed planning,
nectedbulkelectricsystembyfacilitatinginfor-
design, or operating criteria. For these rare
mation exchange and coordination among
events, the operating entity is required to have
reliability service organizations.
emergency procedures covering a credible
range of emergency scenarios. Operators must Recent changes in the electricity industry have
betrainedtorecognizeandtakeeffectiveaction altered many of the traditional mechanisms,
inresponsetotheseemergencies.Todealwitha incentives and responsibilities of the entities
system emergency that results in a blackout, involved in ensuring reliability, to the point that
such as the one that occurred on August 14, the voluntary system of compliance with reliabil-
2003,theremustbeproceduresandcapabilities ity standards is generally recognized as not ade-
to use “black start” generators (capable of quate to current needs.3 NERC and many other
restartingwithnoexternalpowersource)andto electricityorganizationssupportthedevelopment
coordinate operations in order to restore the ofanewmandatorysystemofreliabilitystandards
10  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

andcompliance,backstoppedintheUnitedStates that owned and operated generation, transmis-
by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. sion, and distribution. While that is still true in
This will require federal legislation in the United some areas, there has been significant restructur-
Statestoprovideforthecreationofanewelectric ingofoperatingfunctionsandsomeconsolidation
reliability organization with the statutory author- of control areas into regional operating entities.
ity to enforce compliance with reliability stan- Utility industry restructuring has led to an
dards among all market participants. Appropriate unbundling of generation, transmission and dis-
government entities in Canada and Mexico are tribution activities such that the ownership and
prepared to take similar action, and some have operation of these assets have been separated
already done so. In the meantime, NERC encour- either functionally or through the formation of
ages compliance with its reliability standards independent entities called Independent System
through an agreement with its members. Operators (ISOs) and Regional Transmission
Organizations (RTOs).
NERC’s members are ten regional reliability
  ISOs and RTOs in the United States have been
councils. (See Figure 2.5 for a map showing the
authorizedbyFERCtoimplementaspectsofthe
locationsandboundariesoftheregionalcouncils.)
EnergyPolicyActof1992andsubsequentFERC
In turn, the regional councils have broadened
policy directives.
their membership to include all segments of the
electricindustry:investor-ownedutilities;federal   TheprimaryfunctionsofISOsandRTOsareto
power agencies; rural electric cooperatives; state, manage in real time and on a day-ahead basis
municipal and provincial utilities; independent thereliabilityofthebulkpowersystemandthe
power producers; power marketers; and end-use operation of wholesale electricity markets
customers.Collectively,themembersoftheNERC within their footprint.
regionsaccountforvirtuallyalltheelectricitysup-
  ISOsandRTOsdonotowntransmissionassets;
plied in the United States, Canada, and a portion
they operate or direct the operation of assets
ofBajaCaliforniaNorte,Mexico.Thetenregional
owned by their members.
councils jointly fund NERC and adapt NERC
