Canada the interviews, the interviewers sought informa-
MinisterDhaliwal,astheMinisterresponsiblefor tion and data about control room operations and
Natural Resources Canada, was appointed by practices, the organization’s system status and
PrimeMinisterChrétienastheCanadianCo-Chair conditions on August 14, the organization’s oper-
of the Task Force. Minister Dhaliwal worked atingproceduresandguidelines,loadlimitsonits
closely with his American Co-Chair, Secretary of system,emergencyplanningandprocedures,sys-
EnergyAbraham,aswellasNERCandhisprovin- tem security analysis tools and procedures, and
cial counterparts in carrying out his responsibili- practices for voltage and frequency monitoring.
ties. When NRCan Minister R. John Efford Similar interviews were held later with staff at
assumed his role as the new Canadian Co-Chair, Ontario’s Independent Electricity Market Opera-
hecontinuedtoworkcloselywithSecretaryAbra- tor (IMO) and Hydro One in Canada.
ham and the three Working Groups.
On August 22 and 26, NERC directed the reliabil-
Under Canadian law, the Task Force was charac- itycoordinatorsattheISOstoobtainawiderange
terizedasanon-statutory,advisorybodythatdoes ofdataandinformationfromthecontrolareacoor-
not have independent legal personality. The Task dinatorsundertheiroversight.Thedatarequested
Forcedidnothaveanypowertocompelevidence included System Control and Data Acquisition
or witnesses, nor was it able to conduct searches (SCADA)logs,EnergyManagementSystem(EMS)
or seizures. In Canada, the Task Force relied on logs, alarm logs, data from local digital fault
voluntary disclosure for obtaining information recorders,dataontransmissionlineandgenerator
pertinent to its work. “trips” (i.e., automatic disconnection to prevent
physical damage to equipment), state estimator
Oversight and Coordination
data, operator logs and transcripts, and informa-
tion related to the operation of capacitors, phase
The Task Force’s U.S. and Canadian coordinators
shifting transformers, load shedding, static var
held frequent conference calls to ensure that all
compensators, special protection schemes or sta-
components of the investigation were making
bility controls, and high-voltage direct current
timelyprogress.TheybriefedbothSecretaryAbra-
(HVDC) facilities. NERC issued another data
ham and Minister R. John Efford (Minister
requesttoFirstEnergyonSeptember15forcopies
Dhaliwal, Phase I) regularly and provided weekly
of studies since 1990 addressing voltage support,
summariesfromallcomponentsontheprogressof
reactive power supply, static capacitor applica-
theinvestigation.DuringpartofPhaseI,thelead-
tions, voltage requirements, import or transfer
ership of the electric system investigation team
capabilities (in relation to reactive capability or
held daily conference calls to address analytical
voltage levels), and system impacts associated
and process issues important to the investigation.
with unavailability of the Davis-Besse plant. All
The three Working Groups held weekly confer-
parties were instructed that data and information
ence calls to enable the investigation teams to
providedtoeitherDOEorNERCdidnothavetobe
update the Working Group members on the state
submitted a second time to the other entity—all
of the overall analysis. Conference calls also
material provided would go into a common data
focused on the analysis updates and the need to
base.
ensure public availability of all inputs to the
development of recommendations. Working
FortheInterimReporttheinvestigativeteamheld
Group members attended panels and face-to-face
three technical conferences (August 22, Septem-
meetings to review drafts of the report.
ber8-9,andOctober1-3)withtheRTOsandISOs
and key utilities aimed at clarifying the data
Electric System Investigation Phase I
received, filling remaining gaps in the data, and
Investigative Process developing a shared understanding of the data’s
implications.
Collection of Data and Information from ISOs,
Utilities, States, and the Province of Ontario Data “Warehouse”
On Tuesday, August 19, 2003, investigators affili- The data collected by the investigative team was
ated with the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) organized in an electronic repository containing
began interviewing control room operators and thousands of transcripts, graphs, generator and
other key officials at the ISOs and the companies transmission data and reports at the NERC head-
mostdirectlyinvolvedwiththeinitialstagesofthe quartersinPrinceton,NewJersey.Thewarehouse
outage. In addition to the information gained in containsmorethan20gigabytesofinformation,in
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  181

more than 10,000 files. This established a set of objectivewastoidentifyindustryproceduresthat
validated databases that the analytic teams could are in place today for collecting information fol-
access as needed. lowinglarge-scaletransmissionrelatedpowerout-
agesandtoassessthoseproceduresintermsofthe
Individual investigative teams conducted their
August 14, 2003 power outage investigation.
activitiesthroughanumberofin-personmeetings
aswellasconferencecallsande-mailcommunica- They sought to:
tions over the months of the investigation.
  Determine what happened in terms of immedi-
Detailed investigative team findings will be
ate causes, sequence of events, and resulting
includedinupcomingtechnicalreportsissuedby
consequences;
NERC.
  Understand the failure mechanism via record-
The following were the information sources for
ingsofsystemvariablessuchasfrequency,volt-
the Electric System Investigation:
ages, and flows;
  Interviews conducted by members of the   Enable disturbance re-creation using computer
U.S.-Canada Electric Power System Outage
models for the purposes of understanding the
Investigation Team with personnel at all of the
mechanismoffailure,identifyingwaystoavoid
utilities, control areas and reliability coordina-
or mitigate future failures, and assessing and
tors in the weeks following the blackout.
improving the integrity of computer models;
  Threefact-gatheringmeetingsconductedbythe   Identifydeeper,underlyingfactorscontributing
Investigation Team with personnel from the to the failure (e.g., general policies, standard
aboveorganizationsonAugust22,September8 practices,communicationpaths,organizational
and 9, and October 1 to 3, 2003. cultures).
  Three public hearings held in Cleveland, Ohio; Sequence of Events
New York City, New York; and Toronto,
More than 800 events occurred during the black-
Ontario.
outofAugust14.Theeventsincludedtheopening
  Two technical conferences held in Philadel- and closing of transmission lines and associated
phia, Pennsylvania, and Toronto, Canada. breakers and switches, the opening of transform-
ers and associated breakers, and the tripping and
  Materials provided by the above organizations
starting of generators and associated breakers.
in response to one or more data requests from
Most of these events occurred in the few minutes
the Investigation Team.
of the blackout cascade between 16:06 and 16:12
  All taped phone transcripts between involved EDT. To properly analyze a blackout of this mag-
operations centers. nitude, an accurate knowledge of the sequence of
eventsmustbeobtainedbeforeanyanalysisofthe
  Additionalinterviewsandfieldvisitswithoper-
blackout can be performed.
ating personnel on specific issues in October
2003 and January 2004. Establishing a precise and accurate sequence of
outage-relatedeventswasacriticalbuildingblock
  Field visits to examine transmission lines and
for the other parts of the investigation. One of the
vegetation at short-circuit locations.
key problems in developing this sequence was
  Materialsprovidedbyutilitiesandstateregula- that although much of the data pertinent to an
eventwastime-stamped,therewasvariationfrom
tors in response to data requests on vegetation
source to source in how the time-stamping was
management issues.
done,andnotallofthetime-stampsweresynchro-
  Detailed examination of thousands of individ- nized to the National Institute of Standards and
ual relay trips for transmission and generation Technology(NIST)standardclockinBoulder,CO.
events. Validating the timing of specific events became a
large, important, and sometimes difficult task.
Data Exploration and Requirements
This work was also critical to the issuance by the
Thisgrouprequesteddatafromthefollowingcon- TaskForceonSeptember12ofa“timeline”forthe
trol areas and their immediate neighbors: MISO, outage. The timeline briefly described the princi-
MECS, FE, PJM, NYISO, ISO-NE, and IMO. The pal events, in sequence, leading up to the initia-
data and exploration and requirements group’s tionoftheoutage’scascadephase,andtheninthe
182  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

cascade itself. The timeline was not intended, reclosing of outages facilities during the
however, to address the causal relationships sequence of events, load shedding, generation
among the events described, or to assign fault or redispatch, and combinations of load shedding
responsibility for the blackout. All times in the and redispatch.
chronology are in Eastern Daylight Time.   Compared transaction tags for August 14, to
showhowtheymatchedupwiththoseofother
System Modeling and Simulation Analysis
days in 2003 and 2002.
The system modeling and simulation team
  Analyzed the transactions and generation dis-
(SMST) replicated system conditions on August
patchchangesusedtobringreplacementpower
14 and the events leading up to the blackout. The
for the loss of Eastlake 5 generation into
modeling reflects the state of the electric system.
FirstEnergy, to determine where the replace-
Once benchmarked to actual conditions at
ment power came from.
selected critical times on August 14, it allowed
  Analyzed the performance of the Interchange
analysts to conduct a series of sensitivity studies
Distribution Calculator (IDC) and its potential
to determine if the system was stable and within
capability to help mitigate the overloads.
limits at each point in time leading up to the cas-
cade. The analysis also confirmed when the sys- The SMST began its efforts using the base case
tem became unstable and allowed analysts to test data and model provided by FirstEnergy as its
whether measures such as load-shedding would foundation.
have prevented the cascade.
The modeling and system studies work was per-
ThisteamconsistedofanumberofNERCstaffand formed under the guidance of a specially formed
persons with expertise in areas necessary to read MAAC-ECAR-NPCC (MEN) Coordinating Group,
and interpret all of the data logs, digital fault consisting of the Regional Managers from those
recorder information, sequence of events record- three regions impacted by the blackout, and their
ers information, etc. The team consisted of about respective regional chairmen or designees.
40peopleinvolvedatvariousdifferenttimeswith
Assessment of Operations Tools, SCADA/EMS,
additional experts from the affected areas to
Communications, and Operations Planning
understand the data.
Overall, this team: TheOperationsTools,SCADA/EMS,Communica-
tions,andOperationsPlanningTeamassessedthe
  Created steady-state power flow cases for
observability of the electric system to operators
observed August 14 system conditions starting
and reliability coordinators, and the availability
at 15:00 EDT through about 16:05 EDT (when
and effectiveness of operational (real-time and
powerflow simulations were no longer ade-
day-ahead) reliability assessment tools, including
quate), about the time of the Sammis-Star
redundancyofviewsandtheabilitytoobservethe
345-kV outage.
“bigpicture”regardingbulkelectricsystemcondi-
  Compiled relevant data for dynamic modeling
tions. The team investigated operating practices
of affected systems (e.g. generator dynamic
andeffectivenessofoperatingentitiesandreliabil-
models, load characteristics, special protection
ity coordinators in the affected area. This team
schemes, etc.).
investigated all aspects of the blackout related to
  Performed rigorous contingency analysis (over operator and reliability coordinator knowledge of
800 contingencies in Eastern Interconnection system conditions, action or inactions, and
run)todetermineifthesystemwaswithinoper- communications.
ating within thermal and voltage limits, and
The Operations and Tools team conducted exten-
withinlimitsforpossiblefurthercontingencies
sive interviews with operating personnel at
(N-1 contingencies) prior to and during the ini-
the affected facilities. They participated in the
tial events of the blackout sequence.
technical investigation meetings with affected
  Performed sensitivity analysis to determine the
operators in August, September and October and
significance of pre-existing conditions such as
reviewed the August 14 control room transcripts
transmission outages in Cinergy and Dayton,
indetail.Thisgroupinvestigatedtheperformance
and the earlier loss of Eastlake unit 5
of the MISO and FirstEnergy EMS hardware and
generation.
software and its impact on the blackout, and
  Performed “what-if” analysis to determine looked at operator training (including the use
potential impacts of remedial actions such as of formal versus “on-the-job” training) and the
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  183

communications and interactions between the reported on patterns and conclusions regarding
operations and information technology support whatcausedgenerationfacilitiestotrip.Theteam
staff at both organizations. identifiedanyunexpectedperformanceanomalies
orunexplainedevents.Theteamassessedgenera-
Frequency/ACE Analysis
tor maintenance practices in the affected area as
The Frequency/ACE Team analyzed potential fre- compared to good utility practice. The team ana-
quency anomalies that may have occurred on lyzed the coordination of generator under-
August14,ascomparedtotypicalinterconnection frequency settings with transmission settings,
operations. The team also determined whether suchasunder-frequencyloadshedding.Theteam
therewereanyunusualissueswithcontrolperfor- gathered and analyzed data on affected nuclear
mance and frequency and any effects they may units and worked with the Nuclear Regulatory
have had related to the cascading failure, and Commission to address U.S. nuclear unit issues.
whether frequency-related anomalies were con-
The Generator Performance team sent out an
tributing factors or symptoms of other problems
extensivedatarequesttogeneratorownersduring
leading to the cascade.
PhaseIoftheinvestigation,butdidnotreceivethe
Assessment of Transmission System bulk of the responses until Phase II. The analysis
Performance, Protection, Control, in this report uses the time of generator trip as it
Maintenance, and Damage wasreportedbytheplantowner,orthetimewhen
thegeneratorceasedfeedingpowerintothegridas
This team investigated the causes of all transmis-
determined by a system monitoring device, and
sion facility automatic operations (trips and
synchronized those times to other known grid
reclosings)leadinguptoandthroughtotheendof
eventsasbestaspossible.However,manygenera-
the cascade on all facilities greater than 100 kV.
tionownersofferedlittleinformationonthecause
Included in the review were relay protection and
of unit trips or key information on conditions at
remedial action schemes, including under-
their units, so it may never be possible to fully
frequency load-shedding and identification of the
determine what happened to all the generators
cause of each operation and any misoperations
affectedbytheblackout,andwhytheyperformed
that may have occurred. The team also assessed
astheydid.Inparticular,itisnotclearwhatpoint
transmissionfacilitymaintenancepracticesinthe
intimeeachreportedgeneratortriptimereflects—
affected area as compared to good utility practice
i.e.,wheninthecyclebetweenwhenthegenerator
and identified any transmission equipment that
