blackout might have been averted would have
events wererelated tooneanother andtothecas-
been to drop at least 1,500 MW of load around
cade. Specific causes of the blackout and associ-
Cleveland and Akron. No such effort was made,
ated recommendations are identified by icons.
however, and by 15:46 EDT it may already have
beentoolateforalargeload-shedtomakeanydif-
ference. After 15:46 EDT, the loss of some of FE’s Phase 1:
key 345-kV lines in northern Ohio caused its
A Normal Afternoon Degrades:
underlying network of 138-kV lines to begin to
fail,leadinginturntothelossofFE’sSammis-Star 12:15 EDT to 14:14 EDT
345-kV line at 16:06 EDT. The chapter concludes
with the loss of FE’s Sammis-Star line, the event Overview of This Phase
that triggered the uncontrollable 345 kV cascade
Northern Ohio was experiencing an ordinary
portion of the blackout sequence.
August afternoon, with loads moderately high to
ThelossoftheSammis-Starlinetriggeredthecas- serve air conditioning demand, consuming high
cade because it shut down the 345-kV path into levels of reactive power. With two of Cleveland’s
northern Ohio from eastern Ohio. Although the active and reactive power production anchors
areaaroundAkron,Ohiowasalreadyblackedout already shut down (Davis-Besse and Eastlake 4),
due to earlier events, most of northern Ohio thelossoftheEastlake5unitat13:31EDTfurther
remained interconnected and electricity demand depleted critical voltage support for the Cleve-
was high. This meant that the loss of the heavily land-Akron area. Detailed simulation modeling
overloaded Sammis-Star line instantly created revealsthatthelossofEastlake5wasasignificant
majorandunsustainableburdensonlinesinadja- factor in the outage later that afternoon—
centareas,andthecascadespreadrapidlyaslines with Eastlake 5 out of service, transmission line
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  45

Figure 5.1. Timeline: Start of the Blackout in Ohio
loadingswerenotablyhigherbutwellwithinnor- 12:15 and 15:34 EDT, due to a combination of
mal ratings. After the loss of FE’s Har- humanerrorandtheeffectofthelossofDPL’sStu-
ding-Chamberlin line at 15:05 EDT, the system art-AtlantalineonotherMISOlinesasreflectedin
eventually became unable to sustain additional the state estimator’s calculations. Without an
contingencies, even though key 345 kV line load- effectivestateestimator,MISOwasunabletoper-
ings did not exceed their normal ratings. Had form contingency analyses of generation and line
Eastlake 5 remained in service, subsequent line losses within its reliability zone. Therefore,
loadings would have been lower. Loss of Eastlake through 15:34 EDT MISO could not determine
5, however, did not initiate the blackout. Rather, that with Eastlake 5 down, other transmission
subsequent computer failures leading to the loss lines would overload if FE lost a major transmis-
of situational awareness in FE’s control room and sion line, and could not issue appropriate warn-
the loss of key FE transmission lines due to con- ings and operational instructions.
tacts with trees were the most important causes.
In the investigation interviews, all utilities, con-
At 14:02 EDT, Dayton Power & Light’s (DPL) Stu- trol area operators, and reliability coordinators
art-Atlanta 345-kV line tripped off-line due to a indicatedthatthemorningofAugust14wasarea-
tree contact. This line had no direct electrical sonablytypicalday.1FEmanagersreferredtoitas
effectonFE’ssystem—butitdidaffectMISO’sper- peakloadconditionsonalessthanpeakloadday.
formance as reliability coordinator, even though Dispatchers consistently said that while voltages
PJMisthereliabilitycoordinatorfortheDPLline. were low, they were consistent with historical
One of MISO’s primary system condition evalua- voltages.2 Throughout the morning and early
tiontools,itsstateestimator,wasunabletoassess afternoon of August 14, FE reported a growing
system conditions for most of the period between need for voltage support in the upper Midwest.
46  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

The FE reliability operator was concerned about askedtoreducetheirrealpoweroutputtobeable
low voltage conditions on the FE system as early to produce more reactive output. He called the
as 13:13 EDT. He asked for voltage support (i.e., Sammis plant at 13:13 EDT, West Lorain at 13:15
increased reactive power output) from FE’s inter- EDT, Eastlake at 13:16 EDT, made three calls to
connected generators. Plants were operating in unidentifiedplantsbetween13:20EDTand13:23
automatic voltage control mode (reacting to sys- EDT, a “Unit 9” at 13:24 EDT, and two more at
temvoltageconditionsandneedsratherthancon- 13:26EDTand13:28EDT.4Theoperatorsworked
stant reactive power output). As directed in FE’s to get shunt capacitors at Avon that were out of
ManualofOperations,3theFEreliabilityoperator service restored to support voltage,5 but those
began to call plant operators to ask for additional capacitors could not be restored to service.
voltagesupportfromtheirunits.Henotedtomost
of them that system voltages were sagging “all FollowingthelossofEastlake5at13:31EDT,FE’s
over.”Severalmentionedthattheywerealreadyat operators’ concern about voltage levels increased.
or near their reactive output limits. None were They called Bay Shore at 13:41 EDT and Perry at
Energy Management System (EMS) and Decision Support Tools
Operators look at potential problems that could their own transmission facilities, and recognize
ariseontheirsystemsbyusingcontingencyanal- the impact on their own systems of events and
yses,drivenfromstateestimation,thatarefedby facilities in neighboring systems. To accomplish
data collected by the SCADA system. this, system state estimators use the real-time
datameasurementsavailableonasubsetofthose
SCADA: System operators use System Control
facilitiesinacomplexmathematicalmodelofthe
and Data Acquisition systems to acquire power
power system that reflects the configuration of
system data and control power system equip-
the network (which facilities are in service and
ment. SCADA systems have three types of ele-
which are not) and real-time system condition
ments: field remote terminal units (RTUs),
data to estimate voltage at each bus, and to esti-
communication to and between the RTUs, and
mate real and reactive power flow quantities on
one or more Master Stations.
eachlineorthrougheachtransformer.Reliability
Field RTUs, installed at generation plants and
coordinators and control areas that have them
substations, are combination data gathering and
commonlyrunastateestimatoronregularinter-
device control units. They gather and provide
vals or only as the need arises (i.e., upon
informationofinteresttosystemoperators,such
demand). Not all control areas use state
asthestatusofabreaker(switch),thevoltageon
estimators.
a line or the amount of real and reactive power
beingproducedbyagenerator,andexecutecon-
Contingency Analysis: Given the state estima-
trol operations such as opening or closing a
tor’srepresentationofcurrentsystemconditions,
breaker. Telecommunications facilities, such as
a system operator or planner uses contingency
telephonelinesormicrowaveradiochannels,are
analysistoanalyzetheimpactofspecificoutages
provided for the field RTUs so they can commu-
(lines, generators, or other equipment) or higher
nicate with one or more SCADA Master Stations
load,flow,orgenerationlevelsonthesecurityof
or, less commonly, with each other.
the system. The contingency analysis should
MasterstationsarethepiecesoftheSCADAsys- identify problems such as line overloads or volt-
temthatinitiateacycleofdatagatheringfromthe ageviolationsthatwilloccurifanewevent(con-
field RTUs over the communications facilities, tingency) happens on the system. Some
withtimecyclesrangingfromeveryfewseconds transmission operators and control areas have
toaslongasseveralminutes.Inmanypowersys- and use state estimators to produce base cases
tems,MasterStationsarefullyintegratedintothe fromwhichtoanalyzenextcontingencies(“N-1,”
control room, serving as the direct interface to meaning normal system minus 1 key element)
theEnergyManagementSystem(EMS),receiving fromthecurrentconditions.Thistoolistypically
incoming data from the field RTUs and relaying usedtoassessthereliabilityofsystemoperation.
controloperationscommandstothefielddevices Many control areas do not use real time contin-
for execution. gency analysis tools, but others run them on
StateEstimation:Transmissionsystemoperators demand following potentially significant system
musthavevisibility(conditioninformation)over events.
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  47

Figure 5.2. Timeline Phase 1
13:43 EDT to ask the plants for more voltage sup- every 5 minutes, and the RTCA less frequently. If
port. Again, while there was substantial effort to themodeldoesnothaveaccurateandtimelyinfor-
supportvoltagesintheOhioarea,FirstEnergyper- mationaboutkeypiecesofsystemequipmentorif
sonnel characterized the conditions as not being key input data are wrong, the state estimator may
unusualforapeakloadday,althoughthiswasnot beunabletoreachasolutionoritwillreachasolu-
an all-time (or record) peak load day.6 tionthatislabeledashavingahighdegreeoferror.
In August, MISO considered its SE and RTCA
Key Phase 1 Events tools to be still under development and not fully
mature;thosesystemshavesincebeencompleted
1A) 12:15EDTto16:04EDT:MISO’sstateestima-
and placed into full operation.
tor software solution was compromised, and
MISO’s single contingency reliability assess- On August 14 at about 12:15 EDT, MISO’s state
ment became unavailable. estimator produced a solution with a high mis-
match (outside the bounds of acceptable error).
1B) 13:31:34EDT:EastlakeUnit5generationtrip-
This was traced to an outage of Cinergy’s
ped in northern Ohio.
Bloomington-Denois Creek 230-kV line—
1C) 14:02 EDT: Stuart-Atlanta 345-kV transmis- although it was out of service, its status was not
sion line tripped in southern Ohio. updated in MISO’s state estimator. Line status
information within MISO’s reliability coordina-
1A) MISO’s State Estimator Was Turned Off:
tionareaistransmittedtoMISObytheECARdata
12:15 EDT to 16:04 EDT
networkordirectlinksandisintendedtobeauto-
It is common for reliability coordinators and con- matically linked to the SE. This requires coordi-
trol areas to use a state estimator (SE) to improve nateddatanamingaswellasinstructionsthatlink
theaccuracyoftherawsampleddatatheyhavefor the data to the tools. For this line, the automatic
the electric system by mathematically processing linkageoflinestatustothestateestimatorhadnot
raw data to make it consistent with the electrical yetbeenestablished.Thelinestatuswascorrected
system model. The resulting information on andMISO’sanalystobtainedagoodSEsolutionat
equipment voltages and loadings is used in soft- 13:00 EDT and an RTCA solution at 13:07 EDT.
ware tools such as real time contingency analysis However,totroubleshootthisproblemtheanalyst
(RTCA) to simulate various conditions and out- had turned off the automatic trigger that runs the
ages to evaluate the reliability of the power sys- stateestimatoreveryfiveminutes.Afterfixingthe
tem.TheRTCAtoolisusedtoalertoperatorsifthe problem he forgot to re-enable it, so although he
systemisoperatinginsecurely;itcanberuneither had successfully run the SE and RTCA manually
onaregularschedule(e.g.,every5minutes),when toreachasetofcorrectsystemanalyses,thetools
triggered by some system event (e.g., the loss of a were not returned to normal automatic operation.
power plant or transmission line), or when initi- Thinking the system had been successfully
ated by an operator. MISO usually runs the SE restored, the analyst went to lunch.
48  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

The fact that the state estimator Eastlake 4 and Davis-Besse meant that FE had to
Cause 4
Inadequate wasnotrunningautomaticallyon importmoreenergyintotheCleveland-Akronarea
RC Diagnostic itsregular5-minuteschedulewas to support its load.
Support discovered about 14:40 EDT. The
When Eastlake 5 dropped off-line, replacement
automatic trigger was re-enabled
powertransfersandtheassociatedreactivepower
but again the state estimator failed to solve suc-
to support the imports to the local area contrib-
cessfully. This time investigation identified the
uted to the additional line loadings in the region.
Stuart-Atlanta 345-kV line outage (which
At15:00EDTonAugust14,FE’sloadwasapproxi-
occurredat14:02EDT)tobethelikelycause.This
mately 12,080 MW, and they were importing
lineiswithintheDaytonPowerandLightcontrol
about 2,575 MW, 21% of their total. FE’s system
areainsouthernOhioandisunderPJM’sreliabil-
reactive power needs rose further.
ity umbrella rather than MISO’s. Even though it
affectselectricalflowswithinMISO,itsstatushad The investigation team’s system
Cause 1
not been automatically linked to MISO’s state simulations indicate that the loss
Inadequate
estimator. System ofEastlake5wasacriticalstepin
Understanding the sequence of events. Contin-
Thediscrepancybetweenactualmeasuredsystem
gency analysis simulation of the
flows (with Stuart-Atlanta off-line) and the MISO
conditions following the loss of the Har-
model (which assumed Stuart-Atlanta on-line)
ding-Chamberlin 345-kV circuit at 15:05 EDT
prevented the state estimator from solving cor-
showed that the system would be unable to sus-
rectly. At 15:09 EDT, when informed by the sys-
tain some contingencies without line overloads
temengineerthattheStuart-Atlantalineappeared
aboveemergencyratings.However,whenEastlake
tobetheproblem,theMISOoperatorsaid(mistak-
5wasmodeledasinserviceandfullyavailablein
enly) that this line was in service. The system
those simulations, all overloads above emergency
engineerthentriedunsuccessfullytoreachasolu-
limitswereeliminated,even
tion with the Stuart-Atlanta line modeled as in
with the loss of Harding- Recommendation
service until approximately 15:29 EDT, when the 23, page 160
Chamberlin.
MISOoperatorcalledPJMtoverifythecorrectsta-
tus.AftertheydeterminedthatStuart-Atlantahad Cause 2 FEdidnotperformacontingency
tripped, they updated the state estimator and it Inadequate analysis after the loss of Eastlake
solvedsuccessfully.TheRTCAwasthenrunman- Situational 5 at 13:31 EDT to determine
ually and solved successfully at 15:41 EDT. Awareness whether the loss of further lines
MISO’s state estimator and contingency analysis or plants would put their system
were back under full automatic operation and atrisk.FEalsodidnotperformacontingencyanal-
solving effectively by 16:04 EDT, about two min- ysis after the loss of Harding-Chamberlin at 15:05
utes before the start of the cascade. EDT(inpartbecausetheydidnotknowthatithad
tripped out of service), nor does the utility rou-
In summary, the MISO state estimator and real
tinelyconductsuchstudies.7ThusFEdidnotdis-
time contingency analysis tools were effectively
cover that their system was no longer in an N-1
out of service between 12:15 EDT and 16:04 EDT.
This prevented MISO from promptly performing
Figure 5.3. Eastlake Unit 5
precontingency “early warning” assessments of
power system reliability
Recommendations
overtheafternoonofAugust
3, page 143; 6, page 147;
14. 30, page 163
1B) Eastlake Unit 5 Tripped: 13:31 EDT
Eastlake Unit 5 (rated at 597 MW) is in northern
Ohio along the southern shore of Lake Erie, con-
nectedtoFE’s345-kVtransmissionsystem(Figure
5.3).TheClevelandandAkronloadsaregenerally
supported by generation from a combination of
the Eastlake, Perry and Davis-Besse units, along
with significant imports, particularly from
9,100 MW of generation located along the Ohio
and Pennsylvania border. The unavailability of
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  49

secure state at 15:05 EDT, effect on power flows and voltages in the FE area.
Recommendations
andthatoperatoractionwas 3, page 143, 22, page 159 The team examined the security of FE’s system,
needed to remedy the testing power flows and voltage levels with the
situation. combinationofplantandlineoutagesthatevolved
on the afternoon of August 14. This analysis
1C) Stuart-Atlanta 345-kV Line Tripped:
showsthattheavailabilityorunavailabilityofthe
14:02 EDT
Stuart-Atlanta 345-kV line did not change the
The Stuart-Atlanta 345-kV trans- capability or performance of FE’s system or affect
Cause 1
missionlineisinthecontrolarea any line loadings within the FE system, either
Inadequate
System of Dayton Power and Light. At immediately after its trip or later that afternoon.
Understanding 14:02EDTthelinetrippeddueto TheonlyreasonwhyStuart-Atlantamatterstothe
contact with a tree, causing a blackoutisbecauseitcontributedtothefailureof
short circuit to ground, and locked out. Investiga- MISO’s state estimator to operate effectively, so
tion team modeling reveals that the loss of DPL’s MISOcouldnotfullyidentifyFE’sprecarioussys-
Stuart-Atlanta line had no significant electrical tem conditions until 16:04 EDT.8
Data Exchanged for Operational Reliability
Thetopologyoftheelectricsystemisessentially data exchanged range from real-time system
theroadmapofthegrid.Itisdeterminedbyhow data,whichisexchangedevery2to4seconds,to
eachgeneratingunitandsubstationisconnected OASISreservationsandelectronictagsthatiden-
to all other facilities in the system and at what tify individual energy transactions between par-
voltagelevels,thesizeoftheindividualtransmis- ties. Much of these data are collected through
sion wires, the electrical characteristics of each operators’ SCADA systems.
ofthoseconnections,andwhereandwhenseries
ICCP: Real-time operational data is exchanged
