the conclusions summarized here, by describing loss of its transmission lines because it did not
conditions and events during the days before and havesufficientinformationorinsighttorevealthe
the day of the blackout, and explain how those needforaction.Note:NERC’slistofviolationshas
eventsandconditionsdidordidnotcauseorcon- been revised and extended since publication of
tribute to the initiation of the blackout. Chapter 6 the Interim Report. Two violations (numbers 4
addresses the cascade as the blackout spread and 6, as cited in the Interim Report) were
beyondOhioandreviewsthecausesandeventsof dropped, and three new violations have been
the cascade as distinct from the earlier events in identified in this report (5, 6, and 7, as numbered
Ohio. here). NERC continues to study the record and
may identify additional violations.3
The Causes of the Blackout in Ohio Group 1: FirstEnergy and ECAR failed to assess
and understand the inadequacies of FE’s
A dictionary definition of “cause” is “something system, particularly with respect to voltage
that produces an effect, result, or consequence.”1 instability and the vulnerability of the
In searching for the causes of the blackout, the Cleveland-Akron area, and FE did not operate
investigation team looked back through the pro- its system with appropriate voltage criteria
gression of sequential events, actions and inac- and remedial measures.
tions to identify the cause(s) of each event. The
  FE did not monitor and manage reactive
ideaof“cause”isherelinkednotjusttowhathap-
reserves for various contingency conditions as
pened or why it happened, but more specifically
requiredbyNERCPolicy2,SectionB,Require-
to the entities whose duties and responsibilities
ment 2.
were to anticipate and prepare to deal with the
things that could go wrong. Four major causes, or   NERCPolicy2,SectionA,requiresa30-minute
groups of causes, are identified (see box on page periodoftimetore-adjustthesystemtoprepare
18). to withstand the next contingency.
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  17

Causes of the Blackout’s Initiation
TheOhiophaseoftheAugust14,2003,blackout Group 2: Inadequate situational awareness
was caused by deficiencies in specific practices, at FirstEnergy. FE did not recognize or
equipment, and human decisions by various understand the deteriorating condition of
organizations that affected conditions and out- its system.
comes that afternoon—for example, insufficient As discussed in Chapter 5:
reactive power was an issue in the blackout, but
itwasnotacauseinitself.Rather,deficienciesin A) FEfailedtoensurethesecurityofitstransmis-
corporate policies, lack of adherence to industry sion system after significant unforeseen con-
policies,andinadequatemanagementofreactive tingencies because it did not use an effective
power and voltage caused the blackout, rather contingency analysis capability on a routine
than the lack of reactive power. There are four basis. (See pages 49-50 and 64.)
groups of causes for the blackout:
B) FElackedprocedurestoensurethatitsopera-
tors were continually aware of the functional
Group 1: FirstEnergy and ECAR failed to state of their critical monitoring tools. (See
assess and understand the inadequacies of pages 51-53, 56.)
FE’s system, particularly with respect to
C) FE control center computer support staff and
voltage instability and the vulnerability of
operationsstaffdidnothaveeffectiveinternal
the Cleveland-Akron area, and FE did not
communications procedures. (See pages 54,
operate its system with appropriate voltage
56, and 65-67.)
criteria. (Note: This cause was not identified in
the Task Force’s Interim Report. It is based on D) FE lacked procedures to test effectively the
analysis completed by the investigative team functional state of its monitoring tools after
after the publication of the Interim Report.) repairs were made. (See page 54.)
As detailed in Chapter 4:
E) FE did not have additional or back-up moni-
toringtoolstounderstandorvisualizethesta-
A) FE failed to conduct rigorous long-term plan-
tus of their transmission system to facilitate
ning studies of its system, and neglected to
its operators’ understanding of transmission
conduct appropriate multiple contingency or
systemconditionsafterthefailureoftheirpri-
extreme condition assessments. (See pages
mary monitoring/alarming systems. (See
37-39 and 41-43.)
pages 53, 56, and 65.)
B) FEdidnotconductsufficientvoltageanalyses
foritsOhiocontrolareaandusedoperational Group 3: FE failed to manage adequately tree
voltagecriteriathatdidnotreflectactualvolt- growth in its transmission rights-of-way.
agestabilityconditionsandneeds.(Seepages
Thisfailurewasthecommoncauseoftheoutage
31-37.)
of three FE 345-kV transmission lines and one
C) ECAR (FE’s reliability council) did not con- 138-kV line. (See pages 57-64.)
duct an independent review or analysis of
FE’s voltage criteria and operating needs, Group 4: Failure of the interconnected grid’s
thereby allowing FE to use inadequate prac- reliability organizations to provide effective
tices without correction. (See page 39.) real-time diagnostic support.
As discussed in Chapter 5:
D)Some of NERC’s planning and operational
requirements and standards were sufficiently A) MISO did not have real-time data from
ambiguous that FE could interpret them to Dayton Power and Light’s Stuart-Atlanta
includepracticesthatwereinadequateforreli- 345-kVlineincorporatedintoitsstateestima-
able system operation. (See pages 31-33.) tor(asystemmonitoringtool).Thisprecluded
(continued on page 19)
18  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

Causes of the Blackout’s Initiation (Continued)
MISO from becoming aware of FE’s system D) PJM and MISO lacked joint procedures or
problems earlier and providing diagnostic guidelines on when and how to coordinate a
assistance or direction to FE. (See pages security limit violation observed by one of
49-50.) them in the other’s area due to a contingency
near their common boundary. (See pages
B) MISO’s reliability coordinators were using
62-63 and 65-66.)
non-real-time data to support real-time
“flowgate” monitoring. This prevented MISO Inthechaptersthatfollow,sectionsthatrelateto
from detecting an N-1 security violation in particular causes are denoted with the following
FE’s system and from assisting FE in neces- symbols:
sary relief actions. (See pages 48 and 63.) Cause 1 Cause 2
Inadequate Inadequate
C) MISO lacked an effective way to identify the System Situational
Understanding Awareness
locationandsignificanceoftransmissionline
breaker operations reported by their Energy
Management System (EMS). Such informa- Cause 3 Cause 4
Inadequate Inadequate
tion would have enabled MISO operators to
Tree RC Diagnostic
become aware earlier of important line out-
Trimming Support
ages. (See page 48.)
  NERC is lacking a well-defined control area Other Problems:
(CA)auditprocessthataddressesallCArespon-
  FE personnel did not ensure that their
sibilities.Controlareaauditshavegenerallynot
Real-Time Contingency Analysis (RTCA) was a
been conducted with sufficient regularity and
functional and effective EMS application as
havenotincludedacomprehensiveauditofthe
requiredbyNERCPolicy2,SectionA,Require-
control area’s compliance with all NERC and
ment 1.
Regional Council requirements. Compliance
  FE’soperationalmonitoringequipmentwasnot
with audit results is not mandatory.
adequatetoprovideameansforitsoperatorsto
  ECARdidnotconductadequaterevieworanal-
evaluate the effects of the loss of significant
yses of FE’s voltage criteria, reactive power
transmissionorgenerationfacilitiesasrequired
management practices, and operating needs.
by NERC Policy 4, Section A, Requirement 4.
  FEdoesnothaveanadequateautomaticunder-   FE’s operations personnel were not provided
voltage load-shedding program in the Cleve-
sufficient operations information and analysis
land-Akron area.
tools as required by NERC Policy 5, Section C,
Requirement 3.
Group 2: Inadequate situational awareness
  FE’s operations personnel were not adequately
at FirstEnergy. FE did not recognize or
trained to maintain reliable operation under
understand the deteriorating condition of
emergencyconditionsasrequiredbyNERCPol-
its system.
icy 8, Section 1.
Violations (Identified by NERC):
  NERCPolicy4hasnodetailedrequirementsfor:
  Violation7:FE’soperationalmonitoringequip-
(a) monitoring and functional testing of critical
ment was not adequate to alert FE’s operators
EMS and supervisory control and data acquisi-
regarding important deviations in operating
tion (SCADA) systems, and (b) contingency
conditionsandtheneedforcorrectiveactionas
analysis.
requiredbyNERCPolicy4,SectionA,Require-
  NERC Policy 6 includes a requirement to plan
ment 5.
for loss of the primary control center, but lacks
  Violation 3: FE’s state estimation and contin-
specific provisions concerning what must be
gency analysis tools were not used to assess
addressed in the plan.
system conditions, violating NERC Operating
Policy 5, Section C, Requirement 3, and Policy   NERC system operator certification tests for
4, Section A, Requirement 5. basic operational and policy knowledge.
 U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations  19

Significant additional training is needed to MISO Transmission Owners Agreement and
qualify an individual to perform system opera- wasnotundertheMISOtariff,soMISOdidnot
tion and management functions. have the necessary authority as FE’s Reliability
CoordinatorasrequiredbyNERCPolicy9,Sec-
tion B, Requirement 2.
Group 3: FE failed to manage adequately tree
growth in its transmission rights-of-way. This   Although lacking authority under a signed
failure was the common cause of the outage of agreement,MISOasreliabilitycoordinatornev-
three FE 345-kV transmission lines and erthelessshouldhaveissueddirectivestoFEto
affected several 138-kV lines. return system operation to a safe and reliable
level as required by NERC Policy 9, Section B,
  FE failed to maintain equipment ratings
Requirement 2, before the cascading outages
through a vegetation management program. A
occurred.
vegetationmanagementprogramisnecessaryto
fulfillNERCPolicy2,SectionA,Requirement1   American Electric Power (AEP) and PJM
(Control areas shall develop, maintain, and attemptedtousethetransmissionloadingrelief
implement formal policies and procedures to (TLR) process to address transmission power
provide for transmission security . . . including flowswithoutrecognizingthataTLRwouldnot
equipment ratings.) solve the problem.
  Vegetation management requirements are not   NERC Policy 9 does not contain a requirement
defined in NERC Standards and Policies. for reliability coordinators equivalent to the
NERC Policy 2 statement that monitoring
equipmentistobeusedinamannerthatwould
Group 4: Failure of the interconnected grid’s
bring to the reliability coordinator’s attention
reliability organizations to provide effective
any important deviations in operating
diagnostic support.
conditions.
Violations (Identified by NERC):
  NERCPolicy9lackscriteriafordeterminingthe
  Violation 4: MISO did not notify other reliabil- critical facilities lists in each reliability coordi-
itycoordinatorsofpotentialsystemproblemsas nator area.
requiredbyNERCPolicy9,SectionC,Require-
  NERC Policy 9 lacks specifics on coordinated
ment 2.
proceduresandtrainingforreliabilitycoordina-
  Violation5:MISOwasusingnon-real-timedata tors regarding “operating to the most conserva-
to support real-time operations, in violation of tive limit” in situations when operating
NERCPolicy9,AppendixD,SectionA,Criteria conditions are not fully understood.
5.2.
  Violation6:PJMandMISOasreliabilitycoordi- Failures to act by FirstEnergy or others to solve
natorslackedproceduresorguidelinesbetween the growing problem, due to the other causes.
their respective organizations regarding the
Violations (Identified by NERC):
coordination of actions to address an operating
securitylimitviolationobservedbyoneofthem   Violation 1: Following the outage of the Cham-
in the other’s area due to a contingency near berlin-Harding 345-kV line, FE operating per-
their common boundary, as required by Policy sonnel did not take the necessary action to
9,AppendixC.Note:Policy9lacksspecificson return the system to a safe operating state as
what constitutes coordinated procedures and requiredbyNERCPolicy2,SectionA,Standard
training. 1.
Other Problems:   Violation 2: FE operations personnel did not
  MISO did not have adequate monitoring capa- adequatelycommunicateitsemergencyoperat-
bilitytofulfillitsreliabilitycoordinatorrespon- ing conditions to neighboring systems as
sibilities as required by NERC Policy 9, required by NERC Policy 5, Section A.
Appendix D, Section A.
Other Problems:
  AlthoughMISOisthereliabilitycoordinatorfor   FE operations personnel did not promptly take
FE, on August 14 FE was not a signatory to the action as required by NERC Policy 5, General
20  U.S.-CanadaPowerSystemOutageTaskForce August14thBlackout:CausesandRecommendations 

Criteria, to relieve the abnormal conditions 1.Although NERC’s provisions address many of
resulting from the outage of the Harding- the factors and practices which contributed to
Chamberlin 345-kV line. the blackout, some of the policies or guidelines
are inexact, non-specific, or lacking in detail,
  FE operations personnel did not implement
allowing divergent interpretations among reli-
measures to return system operation to within
ability councils, control areas, and reliability
security limits in the prescribed time frame
coordinators. NERC standards are minimum
ofNERCPolicy2,SectionA,Standard2,follow-
requirements that may be made more stringent
ing the outage of the Harding-Chamberlin
ifappropriatebyregionalorsubregionalbodies,
345-kV line.
buttheregionshavevariedintheirwillingness
  FE operations personnel did not exercise the to implement exacting reliability standards.
authority to alleviate the operating security
2.NERC and the industry’sreliability community
limit violation as required by NERC Policy 5,
were aware of the lack of specificity and detail
Section C, Requirement 2.
in some standards, including definitions of
  FEdidnotexercisealoadreductionprogramto Operating Security Limits, definition of
relieve the critical system operating conditions planned outages, and delegation of Reliability
as required by NERC Policy 2, Section A, Coordinatorfunctionstocontrolareas,butthey
Requirement 1.2. moved slowly to address these problems
effectively.
  FE did not demonstrate the application of
effective emergency operating procedures as 3.Some standards relating to the blackout’s
required by NERC Policy 6, Section B, Emer- causes lack specificity and measurable compli-
gency Operations Criteria. ance criteria, including those pertaining to
  FE operations personnel did not demonstrate operator training, back-up control facilities,
procedures to operate when part or all of the
that FE has an effective manual load shedding
EMS fails, emergency procedure training,
program designed to address voltage decays
system restoration plans, reactive reserve
that result in uncontrolled failure of compo-
requirements, line ratings, and vegetation
nents of the interconnection as required by
management.
NERC Policy 5, General Criteria.
  NERCPolicy5lacksspecificsforControlAreas 4.The NERC compliance program and region-
on procedures for coordinating with other sys- based auditing process has not been compre-
tems and training regarding “operating to the hensiveoraggressiveenoughtoassessthecapa-
most conservative limit” in situations when bilityofallcontrolareastodirecttheoperation
operating conditions are not fully understood. of their portions of the bulk power system. The
