Figure 12: Inefﬁciency value for each category (ordered by
number of videos). For null, I = −8.96 and weighted I =
−5.51 (this is cut-off to improve readability).
expected. More generally, a value above 0 represents a category in
which “demand outweighs supply” (popular), and a value below 0
represents a category in which “supply outstrips demand” (unpop-
ular). This provides a normalised view of popularity, in contrast to
the absolute one given in Figure 11.
Figure 12 presents the inefﬁciency levels for all categories, with
both measures of inefﬁciency showing very similar trends. First,
we observe that using the absolute number of views a category
receives is somewhat misleading. The category with the highest
viewing ﬁgures (“AM”) actually receives fewer views than could
be expected from its size in the corpus (I = −0.11).
It seems
that this category collects views through its dominance in the cor-
pus, rather than through an excessive demand for the genre. This
lack of efﬁciency is observable in all other categories too — sev-
eral unexpected genres have a disproportionately large number of
views, whereas other genres have too many videos and too few
views. 27 categories have a disproportionately large number of
videos in comparison to the views received (I  0).8 No categories were found to be truly market 
efﬁcient with “BL” coming closest at 0.016, alongside 14 others
that fall between -0.1 and 0.1.
6.3 Category Colocation
The previous subsection has shown that there are some notable
market inefﬁciencies in YouPorn’s corpus. These inefﬁciencies
could offer a signiﬁcant opportunity for uploaders. For example,
theorists believe that users constantly seek out new forms of visual
stimulation [31]. Therefore, some less populated categories would
be suitable for targeted content injections as their demand outstrips
supply.
However, the ability to allocate a video to multiple categories
(i.e., category colocation), could undermine the independence of
the samples — a video in multiple categories will be far more visi-
ble through category-based browsing. To investigate this, Figure 13
re-plots Figure 12 whilst also presenting the average number of
colocations for each category. For example, Figure 13 shows that
“MA1" is, on average, tagged in a video alongside 6 other cate-
gories. We observe a strong correlation between inefﬁciency9 and
colocation, with a correlation coefﬁcient of 0.66. For instance, the
“GO" category gets 3 times as many views as could be expected
8Interestingly, many of the more unusual niche categories (e.g.
“GO”, “IN2”, “FA1”) fall in this area.
9Note, inefﬁciency also offers a measure of normalised popularity.
-4-3-2-1 0 1 2 3 4AMBL1BRSHBLSTNUANTEBI1MASOFAFIGEMICULETHDIMA1CO2ASEUCU1GRIN1FEPUPOEBHA1SWYOLABIBBCRHAKIRESH1FA1DPWESQPAVOPA1IN2ROVICOCO1GOHERIFUINBI2GA3DSO1InefficiencyInefficiencyWeighted Inefficiency 0 5 10 15AMBL1BRSHBLSTNUANTEBI1MASOFAFIGEMICULETHDIMA1CO2ASEUCU1GRIN1FEPUPOEBHA1SWYOLABIBBCRHAKIRESH1FA1DPWESQPAVOPA1IN2ROVICOCO1GOHERIFUINBI2GA3DSO1-3-2-1 0 1 2 3Number of Colocated CategoriesInefficiency 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 2 4 6 8 10 12Average Views (100k)Number of Categorieslisted in. Obviously, this raises questions about exactly how inher-
ently important categories are, as the tagging of a video in as many
as 10 categories suggests a low level of accuracy in many cases.
Instead, it seems probable that many users use categories as a very
coarse way of targeting interest groups. Once again, this suggests
a level of ﬂexibility that is far less prevalent in traditional media
types. We also ﬁnd that this information is not being exploited well
in YouPorn, with a poor level of market efﬁciency being shown in
the corpus (i.e., often uploaders do not target their content well).
7. ELASTICITY IN CONTENT CONSUMP-
TION
Our results have highlighted a number of characteristics that might
be collectively taken as implying that users do not visit YouPorn
with speciﬁc videos in mind: duration does not matter (Figure 1);
users tend to simply go for the most easily accessible videos (Fig-
ure 7); the number of views depends largely on the video being
listed on the front page (Figure 9); and the number of views is
correlated with the number of categories a video is listed in (Fig-
ure 14). These observations lead us to hypothesise that a signiﬁcant
portion of users are therefore quite ﬂexible in what they watch.
To conﬁrm this apparent elasticity in users’ content consump-
tion requirements (and to verify other ﬁndings), we performed a
small-scale user study, recruiting 46 respondents over social net-
works and mailing lists. Consistent with our expectations, we ﬁnd
that 85% of users ﬁnd it easy or just slightly difﬁcult to ﬁnd content
of interest, with 15% saying they found it difﬁcult. 43% of survey
respondents also said that over 3/5 of the videos they found match
their interests.
We believe that this type of ﬂexibility sheds light on some of the
results obtained in the previous sections. Conﬁrming our earlier
suspicions, the survey shows that the observed ﬁndings do, indeed,
seem to arise from users’ dependencies on the order in which con-
tent is displayed on the default front page, and on category-speciﬁc
pages: when asked what characteristics they use to ﬁnd content
(multiple answers were allowed), we found that only 22% of users
ever visit the site with a pre-determined video in mind. Instead, a
large share of the respondents appear to utilise what we have pre-
viously termed “ﬂexible” ways to discover content: 63% rely on
browsing the front page, 59% use category-based browsing, and
50% utilise the search functionality. Further, in-line with our ear-
lier conjecture, we found that only 9% visit YouPorn through links
from other sites. This is unlike the behavior of YouTube users, for
instance, who rely more on web search engines [19] and external
links [38], rather than browsing.
It is also unlike other types of
repositories, where users primarily visit to watch speciﬁc videos
(e.g., sports games [11]).
When combining the above ﬁndings, it becomes likely that the
more ﬂexible users could all be satisﬁed with a relatively small set
of videos taken from a large range of acceptable ones. We argue
that this ﬂexibility should therefore be leveraged by the content
distribution infrastructure. Speciﬁcally, where many videos could
satisfy the user, we posit that the content distribution infrastructure
should guide users towards those particular ones that also have a
low network cost (e.g., available nearby). This could improve user
quality of experience and reduce network overhead, which beneﬁts
other users as well as ISPs. Considering users’ predisposition to-
wards browsing the front page, this could be done easily: instead of
ordering videos by recency of upload (a common design pattern),
the different browsing pages generated by the web front-end could
also take into account which videos are available near to the viewer.
Most simply, nearby videos that match a user’s interests could be
placed at the top of the front page.
Our user survey indicates that only a small amount of shared
content would be required: 87% of users watch under 10 videos a
session, while 43% watch 3 or less. Assuming a large intersection
between these ﬂexible users’ interests, a relatively small amount of
(generic) content would likely satisfy the demands of many view-
ers. This suggests the approach would be highly feasible in this
domain. However, it must be ensured that optimising the delivery
infrastructure is not done at the expense of a user’s quality of ex-
perience. A key challenge here would be to ensure that this small
amount of content is kept sufﬁciently “fresh”. Only 24% of our sur-
vey respondents stated that they do not get bored easily and would
watch a video multiple times. Thus, it is important that users are
given sufﬁcient choice to ensure that they are provided with novel
items they would wish to watch.
8. SUMMARY AND FUTURE WORK
This paper presented the ﬁrst detailed measurement study of In-
ternet adult media distribution, focussing on the YouPorn website.
Three key aspects of this system have been inspected: the corpus,
the nature of content popularity and the impact of categories. We
found that YouPorn is a hugely popular service with over 60 bil-
lion views recorded from a corpus of 183k videos. Unlike tradi-
tional UGC websites, there is an extremely prominent commercial
element to its content, as well as a seemingly well managed vet-
ting procedure. We observed a number of other interesting prop-
erties, particularly relating to the rapid decay of content popularity
as measured from the number of views, as well as users’ depen-
dency on category metadata to ﬁnd content that matches their inter-
ests. Further investigation uncovered the main reason behind these
observations: the predominant use of YouPorn’s browsing options.
Particularly, this is driven by the apparent ﬂexibility that most users
have when accessing adult media: they do not seek a speciﬁc video,
rather, they search for any video that falls with certain (broad) in-
terest constraints. We posit that this is a characteristic that likely
exists more generally in other multimedia repositories, but to vary-
ing extents. We therefore propose to exploit this observation by
shaping users’ browsing behaviour towards videos with a low net-
work cost. In fact, this could be done with the intention of optimis-
ing any metric. The constantly expanding size and popularity of
these repositories means that this is an approach that may become
increasingly necessary to scale content delivery.
Due to its infancy, there is a signiﬁcant amount of future work
that could focus on adult video streaming. The dataset presented in
this paper has focussed on aggregated system-level and video-level
information. Whereas this offers insights into various corpus and
popularity aspects, it does not provide user-level analysis. The next
stage of our work will therefore focus on this type of data to under-
stand exactly how individual users interact with such websites. This
will capture their behaviour (e.g., skipping), as well as things like
regional differences between user groups. Although not explored in
this paper, our survey indicates that these elements are potentially
quite different from traditional media. Such data will also allow
us to gain a better understanding of things like trafﬁc volumes and
cacheability. We also intend to further develop the ideas explored in
Section 7. Through user-level data, for example, we will be able to
understand the current intersection of user interests and requests.
More extensive user testing will also complement this. Beyond
these targeted avenues of study, there are more general topics of in-
terest, including social networking aspects and deeper analysis of
the “2.0” elements of these services (e.g., ratings, comments, and
recommendations).