我可以帮您优化这段OCR识别转换的学术论文内容。以下是修正后的完整内容：

We find that video popularity in YouPorn follows a far less skewed
distribution than traditionally understood. The reason lies in the
way users discover content, relying heavily on front page browsing.
Due to the non-interest-specific nature of this default browsing, we
conclude that most users have quite loose interest constraints, allowing
them to be satisfied by a potentially large portion of the
corpus. This results in a rapid decline in the number of page views;
most videos die out quickly as they get pushed down the browsing
order by newer published items. Consequently, we deduce that
the level of skew observed is actually largely an artifact of the way
content is presented to users, rather than any inherent aspect of the
video content itself.

6. CATEGORY ANALYSIS
The previous sections have looked at the corpus as a single collection.
However, videos within the corpus can also be listed under
one or more category pages. Although these categories do not offer
definitive information on the semantic nature of the videos, they allow
us to inspect more targeted groups of content and their role in
helping users to discover content of interest.

6.1 Category primer
In total, 62 categories5 are available on YouPorn, spanning a
range of interests. For each video, an initial category is chosen at
upload time. Videos can also later be categorised further by other
users once the content is published. Whilst this community-driven
nature of categories means that some videos could be incorrectly
categorised, it allows a far larger corpus to be accurately categorised
than would be feasible by a small team of administrators.

Only the most popular videos (> 100k views) can resist this decay,
with similar viewing figures being recorded on the first and
second day.4 After the third day of their publication, however, even
extremely popular videos are likely to be pushed down by ≈10
pages, making it significantly harder for users to discover them.
Thus, on the third day, they immediately begin to exhibit the traits
of their less popular counterparts, as their viewing figures plummet.
Future views are then limited to users who are prepared to
more proactively seek content of interest. Relating this to traditional
UGC, Crane and Sornette [18] provide a classification of
video types (memoryless, viral, junk and quality). This would place

4Highly rated videos will appear at the top of the browsing list for
the previous day.
5In fact, 63 exist but one was not populated; it had only been created
a few days before the crawl and therefore we excluded it.

[Figure caption: Number of views per Category (ordered by number of videos in the category)]

We also inspect the collective popularity of these various categories.
Figure 11 presents the accumulated views for each category.
We observe a trend similar to Figure 10, with well populated
categories receiving many views. The most notable exception is
"NU" (videos without a category), which does extremely poorly in
relation to its size in the corpus. Whereas 17% of the corpus has
no category, these videos only collect 2% of the views. Table 2
provides an overview of the top 20 categories, ranked by size.

6.2 Efficiency of categories
We have seen that categories play an extremely important role in
discovering content in YouPorn, and that not participating in this
categorisation can severely impact a video's success.6 We therefore
now inspect the efficiency with which each category attracts views,
compared to their size in the corpus. We compute the inefficiency,
I, of a category as:

I = {
    log(V) - log(C), if V > C
    -(C/V) + 1, otherwise.
}                                  (1)

where V is the fraction of views that the category receives, and
C is the fraction of the corpus that the category constitutes. As a
video can have multiple categories tagged to it, we utilise two ways
of calculating these fractions. The first approach,7 termed inefficiency,
attributes one view to each category that the video is part
of; consequently, a video with two categories, "BL" and "AM", will
have one view allocated to each. Obviously, this first approach will
also artificially inflate the corpus size. The second approach, which
we term weighted inefficiency, splits the views of a video equally
between all categories it belongs to. Specifically, the number of the
video's views attributed to that category are factored by 1/κ, where
κ represents the number of categories a video has. In this case, the
number of videos attributed to the category are similarly factored
down by 1/κ.

6We make mappings available online at http://www.eecs.qmul.ac.uk/~tysong/yp/mappings.txt
7Unless otherwise stated, this calculation of inefficiency is used
throughout the rest of this section.

For both weighted and unweighted inefficiency, if the value of
I is above 0, it means that a category receives a disproportionately
large share of the views, whilst a value below 0 indicates that
a category receives disproportionately fewer views than would be
expected. More generally, a value above 0 represents a category in
which "demand outweighs supply" (popular), and a value below 0
represents a category in which "supply outstrips demand" (unpopular).
This provides a normalised view of popularity, in contrast to
the absolute one given in Figure 11.

[Figure caption: Inefficiency value for each category (ordered by number of videos). For null, I = -8.96 and weighted I = -5.51 (this is cut-off to improve readability)]

Figure 12 presents the inefficiency levels for all categories, with
both measures of inefficiency showing very similar trends. First,
we observe that using the absolute number of views a category
receives is somewhat misleading. The category with the highest
viewing figures ("AM") actually receives fewer views than could
be expected from its size in the corpus (I = -0.11). It seems
that this category collects views through its dominance in the corpus,
rather than through an excessive demand for the genre. This
lack of efficiency is observable in all other categories too — several
unexpected genres have a disproportionately large number of
views, whereas other genres have too many videos and too few
views. 27 categories have a disproportionately large number of
videos in comparison to the views received (I ≤ 0).8 No categories were found to be truly market leaders, exceeding their expected
share of views given their proportion of the corpus. However, it is by far the most
colocated category. On average, videos categorised as "GO" are
also placed in 10.36 other categories. We find that 4 out of the top
10 categories, ranked by the colocation level, are also in the top
10 ranked by normalised popularity. This confirms our suspicion
(backed by the small-scale user study; see Section 7) that category-based
browsing is an intensively used tool.

[Figure caption: Number of colocated categories (ordered by number of videos in the category)]

[Figure caption: Number of views correlated with number of categories allocated to video]

To further validate the impact of colocation, Figure 14 presents
the average number of views against the number of categories a
video belongs to. We observe an almost linear trend in which
videos belonging to multiple categories get more views. On average,
videos without any category receive just 51k views, compared
to 452k for those with 5 categories. We conclude that category
tags appear to be a significant factor that contributes to views. It is
quite possible that uploaders, particularly commercial ones, might
exploit this observation. In fact, not being aware of the importance
of categories can have dire consequences for video popularity. We
observe that uncategorised videos appear in the bottom 20 most
unpopular categories ranked by absolute viewing figures (and the
least popular measured by normalised popularity).

6.4 Summary
We conclude that users in YouPorn rely heavily on category information
for discovering content of interest. This appears to be
primarily driven by category-based browsing; this observation is
best highlighted by the almost linear relationship between the number
of views a video receives and the number of categories it is
assigned to.
